<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="volume-14" id="chapter-14-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Index</h2>
			<ul class="c005 index">
				<li class="c016">Abú ja’dah = father of curls (= a wolf), <a href="#Page_14">14</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Abú Kásim al-Tambúrí = Abú Kásim the Drummer, <a href="#Page_209">209</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Abu Niyyah and Abu Niyyatayn, History of various versions of the names, <a href="#Page_334">334</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">’Adrán (<em>Arab.</em>) tr. “Sheeted,” the ✔ being ’Adr = much and heavy rain, <a href="#Page_7">7</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Afandiyah, Al- (<em>Arab.</em>) = Efendis, <a href="#Page_41">41</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">’Afár, <em>tr.</em> “sand devils,” a word frequently joined with “Ghubár” = dust (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_262">262</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Aghá of the Janákilah = the Chief man (Aghá) of the Gypsies, <a href="#Page_72">72</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Akhaztu dam wajhhi-há (<em>Arab.</em>) = “I bled her of the hymeneal blood,” <a href="#Page_42">42</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">’Akl (<em>Arab.</em>) = comprehension, understanding, <a href="#Page_193">193</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Akram” = the more generous (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_304">304</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“’Alà bábi ’lláh” (<em>Arab.</em>) = for the love of the Lord, gratis, etc., a popular phrase (<em>tr.</em> “At the Gate of Allah Almighty”), <a href="#Page_138">138</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">’Alà hudúd (or Alà hadd) al-Shauk (<em>Arab.</em>) = fulfilling all our desires, <a href="#Page_114">114</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">’Alaka = he hung, <a href="#Page_149">149</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Alà kám (for “kam,” how much?) peasants’ speech, <a href="#Page_224">224</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">’Alá Yadín = Aláeddín, <a href="#Page_265">265</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Allah! Allah!” here meaning “Haste! haste!” 71.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Allah háfiz-ik” (<em>Arab.</em>) = the pop. <em>Pers.</em> expression, “Khudá Háfiz” (“Allah be thy safeguard”), <a href="#Page_218">218</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Allah openeth,” “Allah veileth,” civil forms of refusal, <a href="#Page_315">315</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Allazí ’amaltu fí-him, etc.” = Those to whom I did a good turn, requite me with the contrary thereof (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_253">253</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Alhamdolillah = Glory be to God!” = grace after meat, <a href="#Page_337">337</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Amán” (<em>Arab.</em>) = quarter, mercy (<em>tr.</em> “safety”), <a href="#Page_30">30</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Amawi Mosque of Damascus, one of the four Wonders of the Moslem world, <a href="#Page_36">36</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">’Amil Rasad (<em>Arab.</em>) = <em>lit.</em>, acting as an observatory, <a href="#Page_341">341</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Amsik (<em>Arab.</em>), a “chaff” with the Turks—meaning cunnus-penis, <a href="#Page_93">93</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Amsik lisána-k (<em>Arab.</em>) = “hold thy tongue,” <a href="#Page_93">93</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Andromeda and Perseus, Myth of, brought down to St. George and the Dragon, <a href="#Page_261">261</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Animals (lower) breeding with men, <a href="#Page_331">331</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Anjar = a flat platter (<em>Pers.</em>), <a href="#Page_143">143</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Annus Domini” = Age (the worst disease in human life), <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Apocrypha, Tobias, etc., <a href="#Page_78">78</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Ardabb (<em>prop.</em> “Irdabb”) = five bushels, <a href="#Page_290">290</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Arghá” for “Arkhá” = he “brayed” (like an ostrich) for “his limbs relaxed,” <a href="#Page_31">31</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Armaghánát (<em>Arab.</em>) pl. of “Armaghán” (<em>Pers.</em>) a present, <a href="#Page_59">59</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Arm-pit, Hair shaven or plucked from, <a href="#Page_153">153</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">’Arsah (<em>Arab.</em>) akin to Mu’arris = a pimp, a pander, <a href="#Page_208">208</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Ashdak, usually applied to a wide-chapped face, <a href="#Page_91">91</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">’Ashrah Miah (Al-) = ten times one hundred, <em>ib.</em> “one hundred for the (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> every) ten” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_28">28</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Ashrafi, a gold coin of variable value, <a href="#Page_143">143</a>; <ul><li>the Portuguese Xerafim, <a href="#Page_38">38</a>.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c016">Ash-Shabakah bitáht as-Sayd = thy net for fishing, <a href="#Page_9">9</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Atrábulus (also Tarábulus), Arabisations of Tripolis, <a href="#Page_169">169</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">’Aun, a high degree among the Jinns, a tribe of the Jinn, sometimes syn. with Márid, <a href="#Page_80">80</a>, <a href="#Page_302">302</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Auzah (<em>Arab.</em>), a popular word in Egypt and Syria (<em>Pers.</em> “Oták,” and <em>Turk.</em> “Otah”), <a href="#Page_40">40</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">A’úzu bi ’lláhi min al-Sháytáni’l-<em>Rajími</em> = I take refuge with Allah against Satan the Stoned (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_242">242</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">’Ayn turned into H., <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Bitáht for Bitá ’at, <a href="#Page_9">9</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">’Ayyinah, probably a mis-reading for ’Ayniyyah = a sample, pattern (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_290">290</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Aysh = Ayyu Shayyin, what? 207.</li>
				<li class="c016">Azbad (<em>Arab.</em>) from ✔ Zbd (Zabd) = foaming, frothing, <a href="#Page_31">31</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Azlam” = the more iniquitous (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_304">304</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Bahár (<em>Arab.</em>) often used for hot spices (<em>tr.</em> “pimento”), <a href="#Page_138">138</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Bahr al-Muhít (<em>Arab.</em>) = Circumambient Ocean, <a href="#Page_323">323</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Bakhshísh (written “Bakshísh” after Fellah-fashion), <a href="#Page_243">243</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Bál (<em>Arab.</em>) sing. Bálah = a tale, <a href="#Page_210">210</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Bámiyah = Gumbo, etc. of Brit. India (<em>tr.</em> “rose-mallows”), <a href="#Page_243">243</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Barbarians (Matthew Arnold’s), <a href="#Page_280">280</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Barbasa (with dental sibilant “Sín”) = he sought, looked for (with palatial sibilant “Sád”), = he watered the ground abundantly (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_291">291</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Barbastu = besmeared, <a href="#Page_291">291</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Bartamán” for “Martaban” = a pot, jar, etc. (<em>tr.</em> “a crock”), <a href="#Page_204">204</a>–223.</li>
				<li class="c016">Báshá (<em>Arab.</em> form of <em>Turk.</em> “Pasha”) derivation, <a href="#Page_137">137</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Bashárah, Al- (<em>Arab.</em>) = a gift of good news, <a href="#Page_307">307</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Bast, a preparation of Bhang (<em>Cannabis sativa</em>), <a href="#Page_19">19</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Bát = “the night has passed” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_246">246</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Bát (for “Bit”) = Pass the night here (in Fellah speech), <a href="#Page_246">246</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Batiyah (<em>Arab.</em>) gen. = a black jack, a leathern flagon (<em>tr.</em> “Keg”), <a href="#Page_125">125</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Baysár or Baysárah, a dish peculiar to Egypt = beans seasoned with milk and honey, <a href="#Page_176">176</a>. <ul><li>Also “Baysár” or “Faysar,” <a href="#Page_291">291</a>.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c016">Bhang-eaters, indecencies of, <a href="#Page_196">196</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Bímáristán (<em>Arab.</em> from <em>Pers.</em>) = a “sick house”, hospital, madhouse, <a href="#Page_48">48</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Bísmillah = grace before meat, <a href="#Page_337">337</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Bitá’i (<em>Arab.</em>) = my own, <a href="#Page_9">9</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Bridge of Sanjia in Northern Syria is one of the four Wonders of the Moslem world, <a href="#Page_36">36</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Buksumah (<em>Arab.</em>) = “hard bread” (<em>tr.</em> “biscuit”), <a href="#Page_169">169</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Bulaybul (Al-) = the little nightingale, Philomelet, <a href="#Page_245">245</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Bull used in the East to turn the mill and water-wheel, <a href="#Page_294">294</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Burka’ veil or “Nose-bag,” <a href="#Page_282">282</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Cafilah, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> caravan, <a href="#Page_222">222</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Camel’s pasture divided into “Khullah” (Sweet food called bread) and “Hámiz” termed fruit, <a href="#Page_7">7</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Change from first person into third, looseness of style in the MS. (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_282">282</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016"><em>Chavis and Cazotte</em> quoted, <a href="#Page_49">49</a>, <a href="#Page_64">64</a>, <a href="#Page_66">66</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016"><em>Chenery</em> quoted, <a href="#Page_7">7</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Child-bed customs amongst Moslems, <a href="#Page_177">177</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Church of Rohah (Edessa), one of the four Wonders of the Moslem world, <a href="#Page_36">36</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Census should not be made without direct command of Creator (superstitious idea), <a href="#Page_308">308</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Cob-houses, <a href="#Page_214">214</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016"><cite><span xml:lang="fr">Chronique de Tabari</span></cite> quoted, <a href="#Page_3">3</a>–5.</li>
				<li class="c016">Coffee, <a href="#Page_198">198</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Coffee and sherbet, mention of, makes the tale synchronous with that of Ma’arúf, or the <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span> century, <a href="#Page_55">55</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Confections, or sweetmeats used by way of restoratives in the Bath, <a href="#Page_56">56</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Connexion of Beasts with Humans, and consequences thereof, <a href="#Page_331">331</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Cook and Cooking, Egyptian or Syrian compared with English, <a href="#Page_174">174</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Corpse sprinkled with water, etc., <a href="#Page_257">257</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Cossid (<em>Arab.</em> Kásid), an Anglo-Indian term = a running carrier, <a href="#Page_123">123</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Cramoisy (dressed from head to foot in), a royal sign of wrath denoting torture or death, <a href="#Page_63">63</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016"><span xml:lang="la">Crepitus ventris</span>, <a href="#Page_231">231</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Cynocephalus famed for venery, <a href="#Page_333">333</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Dainty food (Egyptian or Syrian Cook compared with English), <a href="#Page_174">174</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Dakhlah, Al- (<em>Arab.</em>) = the night of going in, <a href="#Page_42">42</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Dallál = broker (same as Sáhib = owner), <a href="#Page_224">224</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Darajatáni (<em>Arab.</em>), <em>lit.</em> = two astronomical degrees (<em>tr.</em> “a couple of hours”), <a href="#Page_110">110</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Darbálah (<em>Arab.</em>), corresponding with <em>Egypt.</em> “Darábukkah,” a tabor of wood or earthenware (<em>tr.</em> “little drum”), <a href="#Page_43">43</a>. <ul><li>Also part of the regular Darwaysh’s begging gear, <a href="#Page_43">43</a>.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c016">Darb al-Mandal (<em>Egypt.</em>) = Striking the magic circle in which enchanter sits when he conjures up spirits (a form of second sight), <a href="#Page_45">45</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Darwayshah (<em>Arab.</em>) = a she-Fakír (<em>tr.</em> “religious mendicant”), <a href="#Page_217">217</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Darwayshes suspected of kidnapping, <a href="#Page_153">153</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Day in the Country,” an old Eastern custom, <a href="#Page_96">96</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Dawí = an echo, <a href="#Page_273">273</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Defloration, regarded by many ancient peoples as if it were porter’s work, <a href="#Page_57">57</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Dijlah, Al- = The Tigris (Hid-dekel), <a href="#Page_151">151</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Dilk (<em>Arab.</em>), more commonly “Khirkah” = tattered robe of religious mendicant (<em>tr.</em> “gabardine”), <a href="#Page_43">43</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Dínárzádeh (W.M. MS.) = “Ducat-born” (for Dínárzád), <a href="#Page_6">6</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Dish-cover used for cleanliness, and to prevent Evil-Eye falling upon food, <a href="#Page_243">243</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Dodges, Eastern, to detect physiological differences between man and maid, etc., <a href="#Page_121">121</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Drinking in a bright light, loved by Easterns, <a href="#Page_193">193</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Drying towels of palm fibre, <a href="#Page_55">55</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Dúna-k (<em>Arab.</em>) = “Well done,” <a href="#Page_239">239</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Ear conceiving love before the eye, <a href="#Page_139">139</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Eat thy pottage,” a formula like our “Cut your mutton,” <a href="#Page_84">84</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Eating and drinking, <a href="#Page_160">160</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Efendi (here meaning the under-governor or head clerk), <a href="#Page_214">214</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Elephants usually are vegetarians, <a href="#Page_265">265</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Enallage of persons” is Koranic and therefore classical, <a href="#Page_39">39</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Everything returns to or resembles its origin, <a href="#Page_13">13</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Evil Eye, <a href="#Page_60">60</a>, 257.</li>
				<li class="c005">Fa’álah (<em>Arab.</em>) = the building craft (<em>tr.</em> “industry”), <a href="#Page_179">179</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Faddah (<em>Arab.</em>), <em>lit.</em> = silver; the smallest Egyptian coin, <a href="#Page_37">37</a>; <ul><li>Faddahs, 2,000 = about 1s. 2d., <a href="#Page_295">295</a>.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c016">Fakakat = <em>lit.</em> “she flowed over like a brimful vessel.” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) <em>tr.</em> here “she expired,” <a href="#Page_333">333</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Fair fate befal thee, etc.,” an address only suited to a king or ruler, <a href="#Page_109">109</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Fanárát (<em>Arab. pl. of the Pers.</em> Fanár = a light house) here equiv. to mod. <em>Gr.</em> <span xml:lang="grc">φανάρ</span> a lantern (<em>Egypt.</em> Fánús) <em>tr.</em> “flambeaux,” <a href="#Page_44">44</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Fár (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>pl.</em> “Fírán” = mouse rather than rat, <a href="#Page_324">324</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Faráfísh (<em>Arab.</em>) a word not found in dictionary—<em>tr.</em> “lumps,” <a href="#Page_12">12</a>; <ul><li>nearest approach to, would be Faráfík (<em>pl. of</em> Furfák) = fine, thin or soft bread, <a href="#Page_12">12</a>.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c016">Farrásh = tent pitcher, body servant, <a href="#Page_157">157</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Farts, savour his own (curious phenomenon), <a href="#Page_231">231</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Faswah (<em>Arab.</em>) = “a silent break wind,” as opposed to “Zirt,” a loud fart, <a href="#Page_231">231</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Faysár, a dish peculiar to Egypt (see Baysár), <a href="#Page_176">176</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Fellah women stain their veils, etc. with indigo (for sorrow), <a href="#Page_248">248</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Feminine venereal paroxysm, <a href="#Page_144">144</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Fidá’i (<em>Pers.</em>) = a robber, a murderer, <a href="#Page_281">281</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Fidawiyah (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>sing.</em> “Fidáwi” = <em>lit.</em> one who gives his life to a noble cause, <a href="#Page_281">281</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Fí Jífán ka’l-Jawábí! (<em>Arab.</em>) meaning small things (or men) and great (<em>tr.</em> “In the well like the tank”), <a href="#Page_106">106</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Finjál (<em>vulg.</em> for “Finján”) = coffee, <a href="#Page_198">198</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Firásah (<em>Arab.</em>) = penetration, <a href="#Page_10">10</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Forwardness on the part of women held to be insulting by modest Moslem, <a href="#Page_68">68</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Fowl (domestic) unknown to Europe till about the time of Pericles (<em>ob.</em> <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr> 429), <a href="#Page_32">32</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Freemasonry, <a href="#Page_288">288</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">“Gasha” = he produced a sound, <a href="#Page_20">20</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016"><em>Galland</em> quoted, <a href="#Page_41">41</a>, <a href="#Page_244">244</a>, <a href="#Page_348">348</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016"><em>Gauttier</em> quoted, <a href="#Page_3">3</a>, <a href="#Page_19">19</a>, <a href="#Page_49">49</a>, <a href="#Page_74">74</a>, <a href="#Page_90">90</a>, <a href="#Page_95">95</a>, <a href="#Page_97">97</a>, <a href="#Page_176">176</a>, <a href="#Page_189">189</a>, <a href="#Page_228">228</a>, <a href="#Page_244">244</a>, <a href="#Page_254">254</a>, <a href="#Page_334">334</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Ghabasah” (<em>Arab.</em>) from Ghabas = obscure, dust-colored (<em>tr.</em> “clouded of color”), <a href="#Page_22">22</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Ghaush = a tree of hard wood whereof musical instruments are made, <a href="#Page_20">20</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Ghaushah = tumult, quarrel, <a href="#Page_20">20</a>; <ul><li>(<em>tr.</em> “clamour”) a Persianism for which “Ghaughá” is a more common form, <a href="#Page_20">20</a>.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c016">Ghawwasha = he produced a sound, <a href="#Page_20">20</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Ghayr Wá’d or “Min ghayr Wa’d” = <em>lit.</em> without previous agreement (<em>tr.</em> “undesignedly”), <a href="#Page_149">149</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Gháziyah (<em>Arab.</em>) = a gypsy (<em>pl.</em> Ghawázi), <a href="#Page_29">29</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Ghiovendé (<em>Turk.</em>), a race of singers and dancers, professional Nautch-girls, <a href="#Page_72">72</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Ghubár = dust (joined to ’Afár = “sand-devils”), <a href="#Page_262">262</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Hálik (<em>Arab.</em>) = intensely black, <a href="#Page_24">24</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Half-man, an old Plinian fable (<em>Pers.</em> Ním-Chihreh, and <em>Arab.</em> Shikk), <a href="#Page_76">76</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Halkah = throat, throttle, <a href="#Page_190">190</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Halwá” = sweetmeat, <a href="#Page_7">7</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Hámiz = pop. term for pickles (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “Sour meat” as opposed to “sweetmeats”), <a href="#Page_7">7</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Hamlat al-jamal = according to Scott, a “Camel’s load of Treasure,” <a href="#Page_59">59</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Hanút (<em>Arab.</em>) = aromatic herbs, <a href="#Page_257">257</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Haráj (in <em>Egypt.</em> “Harág”) = the cry with which the Dallál (broker) announces each sum bidden at an auction, <a href="#Page_37">37</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Harj, gen. joined with Marj (Harj wa Marj) = utter confusion, chaos (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_342">342</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Harj wa Laght (<em>Arab.</em>) = turmoil and trouble (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_342">342</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Hashísh = Bhang in general, <a href="#Page_19">19</a>; <ul><li>confection of, <a href="#Page_195">195</a>.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c016">Háyishah from ✔ “Haysh” = spoiling, <a href="#Page_190">190</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Haysumah (<em>Arab.</em>) = smooth stones (<em>tr.</em> “pebbles”), <a href="#Page_347">347</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Házir (<em>Arab.</em>) corresponds with English “Yes sir!” (<em>tr.</em> “Present”), <a href="#Page_254">254</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Head cut off and set upon the middle of the corpse (in case of a Jew), or under the armpit (in case of a Moslem), <a href="#Page_64">64</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">He for she, <a href="#Page_29">29</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“He found the beasts and their loads and the learned men,” etc., a new form of “<span xml:lang="la">bos atque sacerdos</span>,” <a href="#Page_311">311</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Hemp, Indian, <a href="#Page_195">195</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Her desire was quenched, <a href="#Page_144">144</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Hidyah (<em>Arab.</em>) in Egypt = a falcon (<em>tr.</em> “a Kite”), <a href="#Page_101">101</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Hikáyah (= literal production of a discourse, etc.), <a href="#Page_39">39</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Hilm (vision), “au ’Ilm” (knowledge) <em>Arab.</em> (<em>tr.</em> dreaming or awake) a phrase peculiar to this MS., <a href="#Page_39">39</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“His bones were crushed upon his flesh” for “His flesh ... bones,” <a href="#Page_347">347</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">House masters (also Kings) in the East are the last to be told a truth familiar to all but themselves and their wives, <a href="#Page_351">351</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Houses made of cob or unbaked brick, which readily melts in rain, <a href="#Page_214">214</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Housewife, Egyptian or Syrian, will make twenty dishes out of roast lamb, <a href="#Page_174">174</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Hubban li-raasi-k (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>lit.</em> = out of love for thy head, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> from affection for thee, <a href="#Page_50">50</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Hummus (or Himmis) = vetches, <a href="#Page_7">7</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Húrí (<em>Arab.</em>) for Húr = pool, marsh or quagmire (vulg. “bogshop”), <a href="#Page_206">206</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Huwa inná lam na’rifu-h” (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>lit.</em> = He, verily we wot him not (suggesting “I am he”), <a href="#Page_133">133</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">“I am as one who hath fallen from the heavens to the earth,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> an orphan and had seen better days, <a href="#Page_75">75</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“I change the pasture” = I pass from grave to gay, etc., <a href="#Page_7">7</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">’Ilm al-Hurúf (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>tr.</em> “Notaricon,” <a href="#Page_80">80</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Ikhbár” (= mere account of the discourse, <i><span xml:lang="la">oratio indirecta</span></i>, etc.), <a href="#Page_39">39</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Impotence, Causes and cure of, <a href="#Page_257">257</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Indecencies of Bhang-eaters, <a href="#Page_196">196</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Indian hemp, <a href="#Page_195">195</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“In lam tazidd Kayní” = <em>lit.</em> unless thou oppose my forming or composing (<em>tr.</em> “unless thou avert my shame”), <a href="#Page_11">11</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Ishá” prayer, <a href="#Page_296">296</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Ishári, a word which may have many meanings (<em>tr.</em> “a white cock in his tenth month”), <a href="#Page_341">341</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Istiláh (<em>Arab.</em>) = Specific dialect, idiom (<em>tr.</em> “right direction”), <a href="#Page_104">104</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Istinshák (<em>Arab.</em>) one of the items of the Wuzú or lesser ablution (<em>tr.</em> “water”), <a href="#Page_58">58</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Iyálah = government-general.</li>
				<li class="c016">Iyás al-Muzani, al Kazi (of Bassorah) the Model Physiognomist, <a href="#Page_107">107</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Iz lam naakhaz, wa-illá,” etc., a fair specimen of Arab. Ellipsis, <a href="#Page_300">300</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Ja’ad = a curl, a liberal man, <a href="#Page_14">14</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Ja’ad al-yad = miserly, <a href="#Page_14">14</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Ja’ídiyah (<em>Arab.</em>) a favorite word in this MS. = “Sharpers,” <a href="#Page_14">14</a>, <a href="#Page_280">280</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Jámúsah (<em>Arab.</em>) = buffalo-cow, <a href="#Page_26">26</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Janákilah = gypsies, <a href="#Page_72">72</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Janázah, bier with a corpse thereon, <a href="#Page_289">289</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Jánn, Al- (MS. preserves rare form of, for the singular), <a href="#Page_88">88</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Jaríd, used as a javelin, <a href="#Page_173">173</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Jarídah (<em>Arab.</em>), = a palm-frond stripped of its leaves, <a href="#Page_173">173</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Jauhar-ji (<em>Arab.</em>) a Turkish form for Jauhari, <a href="#Page_21">21</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Jáwúsh (<em>Arab.</em>) for Cháwush (<em>Turk.</em>) = an army sergeant, etc., <a href="#Page_45">45</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Jazdán = a pencase (<em>Pers.</em>), more prop. called Kalamdán = a reed box, <a href="#Page_322">322</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Jeweller, held to be one of the dishonest classes, <a href="#Page_21">21</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Jink of Egypt (called by Turkish soldiers Ghiovendé), <a href="#Page_72">72</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Jumlatun min al-mál = Worth a mint of money, <a href="#Page_59">59</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Kádúm for “Kudúm” (Syrian form) to “adze,” <a href="#Page_101">101</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Káfir (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> a non-Moslem). Everything fair in dealing with, <a href="#Page_316">316</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Káhin, usual plurals of are Kahanah and Kuhhán (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_320">320</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Káhirah = City of Mars, Cairo, <a href="#Page_35">35</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kahramán, (<i><span xml:lang="fr">alias</span></i> Samarbán) (W. M. MS.), <a href="#Page_6">6</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kahramánah (<em>Arab.</em>) = a nurse, a duenna, an Amazon guarding the Harem, <a href="#Page_78">78</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kalak (<em>Arab.</em>), <em>lit.</em> = agitation, disquietude (used as syn. with Kúlanj = a true colic), <a href="#Page_177">177</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kalamdán = reed box, <a href="#Page_322">322</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kalamátu ’llah = the Koran, <a href="#Page_252">252</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Kalansuwah”-cap—a distinguishing mark of the Coptic regular clergy, <a href="#Page_34">34</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kalb (for “Kulbat”) = a cave, a cavern (<em>tr.</em> “conduit,”) 214.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kanát (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>tr.</em> water-leat, <a href="#Page_350">350</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Karb, one of whose meanings is “to inflate the stomach,” <a href="#Page_182">182</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Karít (✔ Kart) = complete, speaking of a year, etc. (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_337">337</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Karkabah (<em>Arab.</em>), clerical error for Karkarah = driving; rumbling of wind in bowels, <a href="#Page_182">182</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kart = complement, or here, “remainder,” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_337">337</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kash’am, a term having various sigs., <a href="#Page_183">183</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kasht = skinning (a camel) ✔ of Mikshat (<em>Arab.</em>), <a href="#Page_100">100</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Kashmar,” a word not to be found in dictionary, <a href="#Page_25">25</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kattán = linen, flax (<em>tr.</em> “linen web”), <a href="#Page_104">104</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kauk (Káka, yakúku) to chuck, <a href="#Page_203">203</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kauk = an aquatic bird with a long neck, <a href="#Page_203">203</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kawík (<em>Arab.</em>) = magpie, <a href="#Page_203">203</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kawwárah, <em>tr.</em> “Sherd” (not found in dictionary), <a href="#Page_179">179</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kayf, a tranquil enjoyment, <a href="#Page_196">196</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kaylúlah = Siesta, <a href="#Page_324">324</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kazázah = vulg. a (flask of) glass, <a href="#Page_179">179</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kazdír, may here allude to the canisters used by small shopkeepers (<em>tr.</em> “tin”), <a href="#Page_338">338</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kerchief, throwing the, <a href="#Page_264">264</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Khalíyáh = bee-hive and empty, <a href="#Page_222">222</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Khauf (Al-) Maksúm = cowardice is equally divided, <a href="#Page_245">245</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Khaznah = the Treasury = 1,000 kis or purses, each 500 piastres, £5,000, <a href="#Page_74">74</a>, <a href="#Page_180">180</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Khil’ah = robe of honour, consists of many articles, such as a horse, sword, etc., <a href="#Page_235">235</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Khwájah (spelt elsewhere “Khwájá”), <a href="#Page_50">50</a>; <ul><li>corresponds with our “good man,” <a href="#Page_62">62</a>.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c016">Kidnapping (by Dervishes), <a href="#Page_153">153</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kiosque, traced through the <em>Turk.</em> Kúshk (<em>pron.</em> Kyúshk) to the <em>Pers.</em> “Kushk” = an upper chamber, <a href="#Page_151">151</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kirsh (<em>pron.</em> “Girsh”) the Egyptian piastre = one-fifth of a shilling, <a href="#Page_72">72</a>, <a href="#Page_281">281</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kirsh (<em>Arab.</em>), <em>pop.</em> “Girsh” = a dollar, <a href="#Page_281">281</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kis = purse = 500 piastres = £5, <a href="#Page_74">74</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016"><em>Koran</em> quoted, <a href="#Page_201">201</a>, <a href="#Page_242">242</a>, <a href="#Page_252">252</a>, <a href="#Page_254">254</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kubbah = vault, cupola, <a href="#Page_290">290</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kuhná, Syriac singular, according to dictionaries (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_320">320</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kuhná, Al- (<em>Arab.</em>), <em>pl.</em> of Káhin’t = diviner, priest (<em>tr.</em> “Cohens”), <a href="#Page_320">320</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kúlanj (<em>Arab.</em>) = a true colic, <a href="#Page_177">177</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kunafání = a baker of kunáfah = a vermicelli cake often eaten at breakfast, <a href="#Page_127">127</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kurbáj (<em>Arab.</em>) = Cravache (“Scourge”), <a href="#Page_214">214</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kursi (<em>Arab.</em>), here = a square wooden seat without back, used for sitting cross-legged (<em>tr.</em> “chair”), <a href="#Page_52">52</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kursi-stool = the stool upon which the Síníyah or tray of tinned copper, is placed, <a href="#Page_170">170</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kurúsh (<em>Arab.</em>), <em>pl.</em> of Kirsh, the Egyptian piastre = one-fifth of a shilling, <a href="#Page_72">72</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kút al-Kulúb, <a href="#Page_225">225</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kút = food not to be confounded with “Kuwwat” = force, <a href="#Page_225">225</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kuwárah = that which is cut off from the side of a thing, <a href="#Page_179">179</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Kuwayyis (dim. of Kaus), much used in Egypt as an adj. = “pretty,” etc., <a href="#Page_350">350</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Labbah (<em>Arab.</em>), usually part of the throat where ornaments are hung or camels stabbed (<em>tr.</em> “necklace”), <a href="#Page_68">68</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Labbayka = here am I (<em>tr.</em> “Here I stand”), <a href="#Page_317">317</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Laght (also <em>pron.</em> Laghat), a synonym of “Jalabah” = clamour, tumult. (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_342">342</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016"><em>Lane</em> quoted, <a href="#Page_19">19</a>, <a href="#Page_29">29</a>, <a href="#Page_34">34</a>, <a href="#Page_43">43</a>, <a href="#Page_45">45</a>, <a href="#Page_55">55</a>, <a href="#Page_56">56</a>, <em>ib.</em>, <a href="#Page_122">122</a>, <a href="#Page_209">209</a>, <a href="#Page_243">243</a>, <a href="#Page_257">257</a>, <a href="#Page_293">293</a>, <a href="#Page_296">296</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Lá tafzah-ní = Do not rend <em>my</em> reputation. (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_295">295</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Lawá’a-hu,” a clerical error for “láwa’a-hu.” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_306">306</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Lawwaha (<em>Arab.</em>) = <em>lit.</em> pointing out, making clear (<em>tr.</em> “bobbed”), <a href="#Page_190">190</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Lawwaha-hu,” a conjectured reading for “lawá’a-hu.” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_306">306</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Learned men exorcising some possible “Evil Spirit” or “the Eye,” a superstition begun with the ancient Egyptians, <a href="#Page_60">60</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Lion lashing flank with tail, <a href="#Page_160">160</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Líwán al-barrání (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>lit.</em> = the outer bench in the “Maslakh” or apodyterium (<em>tr.</em> “outside the calidarium”), <a href="#Page_56">56</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Luh” = to him for “Lí” = to me, <a href="#Page_282">282</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Ma’ádin (<em>Arab.</em>) = Minerals (<em>tr.</em> “ingredients”), <a href="#Page_139">139</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Madáfi al-Salámah (<em>Arab.</em>) = the cannon of safe arrival, <a href="#Page_124">124</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Mafyaat, Al- (<em>Arab.</em>) = <em>lit.</em> “a shady place” (<em>tr. here</em> “mysterious subjects”), <a href="#Page_14">14</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Maghrabi (vulg. Maghribi), <a href="#Page_43">43</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Mahazzin (for Maházim) al Zerdukkant (for al-Zardakhán) according to Scott “Saffron—yoke of eggs,” etc.; according to Lane “apron napkins of thick silk” (<em>tr. here</em> “silken napkins”), <a href="#Page_55">55</a>–56.</li>
				<li class="c016">Mahkamah, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> the Kazi’s Court-house, <a href="#Page_169">169</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Mahmud the Persian and the Kurd Sharper,” a poor version of “Ali the Persian and the Kurd Sharper,” <a href="#Page_242">242</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Ma’húd min ghayr Wa’d, Al- (<em>Arab.</em>) = “the door where the appointment had taken place without risk threatened,” <a href="#Page_66">66</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Maidenhead, taking it held to be porter’s work, <a href="#Page_57">57</a>. <ul><li>Decency compels maidens to show unwillingness in parting with, <a href="#Page_135">135</a>.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c016">Ma’jún (<em>Arab.</em>) pop. applied to an electuary of Bhang (<em>Cannabis sativa</em>) (<em>tr.</em> “confections”), <a href="#Page_56">56</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Mál = flocks and herbs (in Badawi parlance), <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Ma’lúmah (<em>Arab.</em>) = far famed (may also mean “made known” or “afore-mentioned”), <a href="#Page_276">276</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Mál wa Ghawál (<em>Arab.</em>) = moneys and treasures, <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Mál wa Nawál,” <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Mandíl” (kerchief) of mercy, <a href="#Page_31">31</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Manjanik (<em>Arab.</em>) from the Greek <span xml:lang="grc">Μάγγανον</span> or <span xml:lang="grc">Μηχανὴ</span> = a catapult, <a href="#Page_117">117</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Máristán = The Bedlam, <a href="#Page_207">207</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Martabán, <a href="#Page_204">204</a>. <ul><li>See Bartamán, <a href="#Page_204">204</a>.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c016">Mashá’íli (<em>Arab.</em>) the cresset-bearer who acted hangman (<em>tr.</em> “Linkman”), <a href="#Page_23">23</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Masháli = three parallel gashes drawn down cheek of child (to prevent kidnapping), <a href="#Page_153">153</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Mashrút Shadak (<em>Arab.</em>) = split-mouthed, <a href="#Page_91">91</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Massage (Greek synonym <span xml:lang="grc">μάσσω</span> and Latin “<span xml:lang="la">Massare</span>”), <a href="#Page_177">177</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Massage, needlessly derived from <em>Arab.</em> “Mas’h” = rubbing, kneading, <a href="#Page_177">177</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Maugraby used as an approbrious term (Fr. <i><span xml:lang="fr">Maugrebleu</span></i>), <a href="#Page_43">43</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“May it be fortunate to thee,” a little precatory formula to keep off the Evil Eye, <a href="#Page_119">119</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Mazarát (<em>Arab.</em>) from ✔ “Mazr” = (an egg) being addled (<em>tr.</em> qualms), <a href="#Page_177">177</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Miat Mamlúk Kitábí (<em>Arab.</em>) latter word meaning “one of the Book, a Jew” or Christian, <a href="#Page_85">85</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Mídí, clerical error for “Mayyidí,” an abbreviation of Muayyadí = quarter farthing, <a href="#Page_127">127</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Mikshat (<em>Arab.</em>) whose ✔ would be “Kasht” = skinning a camel (<em>tr.</em> “Whittle,”) 100.</li>
				<li class="c016">Milájah = a sheet of cotton used as apparel, <a href="#Page_220">220</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Milk, specific gravity of, <a href="#Page_238">238</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Milk time (father has no connection with the mother during), <a href="#Page_350">350</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Milk time was passed (two years) usual time amongst savages and barbarians, <a href="#Page_350">350</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Min al-Malábis (<em>Arab.</em>) pl. of “Malbas” = anything pleasant or enjoyable, <a href="#Page_149">149</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Min al-Malábis (<em>Arab.</em>) pl. of “Milbas” = dress, garment, <a href="#Page_149">149</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Mirwad = iron axle of pulley, etc.—hence a bar of metal (<em>tr.</em> “ingot”), <a href="#Page_142">142</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Misallah (pl. “Misáll”) = a large needle for sewing canvas, <a href="#Page_288">288</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Moslem school described, <a href="#Page_98">98</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Mourning-dress, <a href="#Page_248">248</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Muaddib al-Atfál (<em>Arab.</em>,) = one who teacheth children, <a href="#Page_95">95</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Mu’ammarjiyah (master masons) vulg. <em>Egypt.</em> for “Mu’ammarín” (<em>tr.</em> “architects”), <a href="#Page_228">228</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Mu’awizzatáni (Al-) “Two Refuge-takings,” <a href="#Page_252">252</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Mubattat (<em>Arab.</em>) from batt = a duck (<em>tr.</em> “duck-shaped”), <a href="#Page_27">27</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Mubarbasah (<em>Arab.</em>) in the fem. because referring to noun Tíz = anus (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_291">291</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Muhandizín = geometricians, architects, for “Muhandisín,” <a href="#Page_228">228</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Mukabbab (<em>Arab.</em>) = vaulted, arched, &amp;c. (<em>tr. here</em> “heaped”), <a href="#Page_9">9</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Mulúkhíyá (<em>der.</em> from Gr. <span xml:lang="grc">μαλάχη</span> from <span xml:lang="grc">μαλάσσω</span> = to soften) a favorite vegetable, <a href="#Page_176">176</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Mulúkhíyah náshiyah (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>lit.</em> = flowing (<em>tr.</em> “gravied mallows”), <a href="#Page_176">176</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Munnaskif (for manáshif) al fillfillee; according to Scott “compound of peppers red, white and black;” according to Lane and <em>tr.</em> here drying towels of Líf or palm-fibre, <a href="#Page_56">56</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Murafraf (passive) from Rafraf = anything overhanging something else (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_338">338</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Musajja’ (<em>Arab.</em>) = rhymed prose or Saj’a, <a href="#Page_133">133</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Na’ash = a box like our coffin, but open at the top, <a href="#Page_289">289</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Nabk = lote tree or <em>Zizyphus lotus</em>, for sprinkling corpses, <a href="#Page_257">257</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Nakkál, or coffee-house tale-teller, <a href="#Page_235">235</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Nakl (<em>Arab.</em>) = copying, describing, transcribing, <a href="#Page_193">193</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Name, not appearing in unedited tales, till much after the proper time for specifying it, <a href="#Page_299">299</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Na’mil ma’allazí, &amp;c., makídah,” idiom “I will do him brown,” <a href="#Page_282">282</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Na’tázu (<em>Arab.</em>) <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span> form of ’áza = it escaped, lacked, &amp;c.; hence this form “we need” <em>tr.</em> “we require,” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_290">290</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Nátúr (<em>Arab.</em>) prop. a watchman (<em>tr.</em> “old man”), <a href="#Page_204">204</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“New lamps for old” as in “Alaeddin,” <a href="#Page_322">322</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Níl (= the high Nile), <a href="#Page_215">215</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Ním-chihreh (<em>Pers.</em>) = Half-man (<em>Arab.</em> “Shikk”), <a href="#Page_76">76</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Niyyah (<em>Arab.</em>) = intent (normal pun upon the name), <a href="#Page_339">339</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“No thing poketh and stroketh more strenuously than the Gird,” or hideous Abyssinian Cynocephalus,—popular Eastern belief, <a href="#Page_333">333</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Nusf = half a dirham, drachma or franc, <a href="#Page_19">19</a>–37.</li>
				<li class="c016">Nusfs (180 in these days = about 10d.), <a href="#Page_98">98</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">O my son! O my Child! (repetition a sign of kindness and friendliness), <a href="#Page_269">269</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">O my uncle! (to elder man): O my cousin! (to youth), <a href="#Page_119">119</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“One day of the days,” a phrase emphasising the assertion that it was a chance day, <a href="#Page_75">75</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings,” &amp;c., an idea not less Moslem than Christian, <a href="#Page_271">271</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Paggí = Tracker, <a href="#Page_8">8</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Pay-day for boys in Egypt (Thursday), <a href="#Page_98">98</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016"><em>Payne</em> quoted, <a href="#Page_332">332</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Pharos of Alexandria, one of the four Wonders of the Moslem world, <a href="#Page_36">36</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Philomelet, The shrilling, <a href="#Page_245">245</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Physiognomist, a favorite character in Arabic folk-lore, <a href="#Page_107">107</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Physiognomy (”Firásah”) unless there be the science of, other science availeth not,” <a href="#Page_10">10</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Piastre (Egyptian) = one-fifth of a shilling, <a href="#Page_72">72</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016"><em>Pilgrimage</em> quoted, <a href="#Page_35">35</a>, <a href="#Page_38">38</a>, <a href="#Page_153">153</a>, <a href="#Page_196">196</a>, <a href="#Page_208">208</a>, <a href="#Page_343">343</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Professional dancer, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, a public prostitute, <a href="#Page_29">29</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Prothesis without apodosis, figure, <a href="#Page_29">29</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Purse = Kis = 500 piastres = £5, <a href="#Page_74">74</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Purses, one thousand compose the Treasury (“Khaznah”) = £5,000, <a href="#Page_74">74</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">“Rá’ih fayn” = wending (art thou) whither? 207.</li>
				<li class="c016">Rais = master, captain, skipper (not owner), <a href="#Page_125">125</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Rajul Ja’ídí = Larrikin, <a href="#Page_280">280</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Ratl (<em>tr.</em> “a pound”), <a href="#Page_295">295</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Reading of “meat and drink” enjoyed by Arabs as much as by Englishmen, <a href="#Page_160">160</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Red robes a sign of displeasure, <a href="#Page_297">297</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Rikáb (<em>Arab.</em>) = Stirrup + “dár” (<em>Pers.</em>) = holder (<em>tr.</em> “groom”), <a href="#Page_24">24</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Rísah (copyist’s error for “Rishah”) = a thread, feather, line, <a href="#Page_259">259</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Ríshah = feather, plume (usual meaning) Dr. Steingass explains, <a href="#Page_259">259</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Riyál (from the <em>Span.</em> “Real”) = royal coin <em>tr.</em> “real”, <a href="#Page_284">284</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Rizk” equiv. for “Al-Rizku ’l-hasanu” = any good thing obtained without exertion (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_245">245</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Rizk maksúm (Al-), an old and sage byword pregnant with significance, <a href="#Page_245">245</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Roger, old name of the parish bull in rural England, <a href="#Page_203">203</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Rub’a” (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>pl.</em> Arbá = the fourth of a “Waybah” (<em>tr.</em> “half a quartern”), <a href="#Page_128">128</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Sáhib = owner (same as “Dallál” = broker), <a href="#Page_224">224</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Sáhibi-h = mate (masculine), <a href="#Page_346">346</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Salásín = thirty (a clerical error for “three”), <a href="#Page_310">310</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Sálihín” (<em>Arab.</em>) = the Saints, the Holy ones (<em>tr.</em> “the Hallows”), <a href="#Page_218">218</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Sanják-dár = the banner-bearer, ensign, <a href="#Page_245">245</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Sanják (<em>Turk.</em>) = flag, banner, <a href="#Page_245">245</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Sanják (in modern parlance) = minor province, <a href="#Page_245">245</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Sára’a hu wa láwa’a-hu = he rushed upon him and worried him (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_266">266</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Saráy not to be confounded with Serraglio = Harem, <a href="#Page_234">234</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Saráy (<em>Pers.</em>) official head-quarters of the Walí, <a href="#Page_234">234</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Sarír = a bier without the corpse, <a href="#Page_289">289</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Sarkhah adwat la-há al-Saráyah” = a cry to which the Palace women raised an echo (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_272">272</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Satíhah (<em>Arab.</em>) = a She-Satíh, <a href="#Page_69">69</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Sattár (<em>Arab.</em>) = “The Veiler,” <a href="#Page_31">31</a> <ul><li>(corresponding with “Jupiter Servator”), <a href="#Page_270">270</a>.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c016">Sayabán (<em>Pers.</em>) = canopy, <a href="#Page_129">129</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Sayyáh (Al-) = the Shrieker, <a href="#Page_245">245</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Sáza, Yasízu” (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>tr.</em> “genealogist,” not a dictionary word—perhaps a clerical error for “Sasa” = he groomed or broke in a horse, <a href="#Page_21">21</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Sciences are of three kinds, etc.” 10.</li>
				<li class="c016"><em>Scott</em> quoted, <a href="#Page_3">3</a>, <a href="#Page_7">7</a>, <a href="#Page_14">14</a>, <a href="#Page_19">19</a>, <a href="#Page_27">27</a>, <a href="#Page_35">35</a>, <a href="#Page_43">43</a>, <a href="#Page_45">45</a>, <a href="#Page_55">55</a>, <a href="#Page_56">56</a>, <a href="#Page_59">59</a>, <a href="#Page_67">67</a>, <a href="#Page_74">74</a>, <a href="#Page_80">80</a>, <a href="#Page_90">90</a>, <a href="#Page_95">95</a>, <a href="#Page_97">97</a>, <a href="#Page_109">109</a>, <a href="#Page_127">127</a>, <a href="#Page_169">169</a>, <a href="#Page_176">176</a>, <a href="#Page_189">189</a>, <a href="#Page_244">244</a>, <a href="#Page_297">297</a>, <a href="#Page_303">303</a>, <a href="#Page_307">307</a>, <a href="#Page_334">334</a>, <a href="#Page_351">351</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Second-sight (<em>Egypt.</em> “Darb al-Mandal”), <a href="#Page_45">45</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Shurbah” (<em>Pers.</em> Shorbah) = mess of pottage (<em>tr.</em> “dish of roast meat”), <a href="#Page_22">22</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Shikk (<em>Arab.</em>) = Half-man, <a href="#Page_69">69</a>, <a href="#Page_76">76</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Shayh = Artemisia, <a href="#Page_343">343</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Sherbet and coffee, mention of, makes the tale synchronous with that of Ma’aruf or the <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span> century, <a href="#Page_55">55</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Sherífí <em>pl.</em> of Sherífíyah (Egyptian form); here “Ashrafis,” <a href="#Page_336">336</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Shahrbáz (W. M. MS.) = City-player or city-falcon, <a href="#Page_6">6</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Shahrzádah (W. M. MS.) = “City born,” (for Shahrázád), <a href="#Page_6">6</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Shajarat Ríh = Wind-tree (?), <a href="#Page_138">138</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Shám ba’d az nisf-i-shab” = dinner after midnight = supper, (<span class="sc">St.</span>) 244.</li>
				<li class="c016">Shámiyánah = a royal pavilion (<em>cor.</em> of <em>Pers.</em> “Sayabán” = canopy), <a href="#Page_129">129</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Shámiyát bi al-Nár, an Inquisitorial costume (<em>tr.</em> “a black habit bepatched with flame colour”), <a href="#Page_79">79</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Sharkh (<em>Arab.</em>) = in dicts. the unpolished blade of hiltless sword (<em>tr.</em> here “a butcher’s chopper”), <a href="#Page_220">220</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Shaykh al-Islám, the Chief of the Moslem Church, <a href="#Page_69">69</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Shaykh, for humility, sits at the side of room, not at the top (“Sadr”), <a href="#Page_84">84</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Shaykh or head of the Guild for thieves, <a href="#Page_282">282</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Sifah (<em>Arab.</em>) lit. = a quality (<em>tr.</em> “property”), <a href="#Page_102">102</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Silken napkins, <a href="#Page_55">55</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016"><cite>Sind Revisited</cite> quoted, <a href="#Page_8">8</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Síníyah = tray of tinned copper, <a href="#Page_170">170</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Sirhán = wolf, <a href="#Page_19">19</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Siwán (<em>Arab.</em>) pl. Siwáwín = pavilion, <a href="#Page_113">113</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Sleep at mid-forenoon considered unwholesome by Easterns, <a href="#Page_324">324</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Smoke of camel’s dung” to drive off Evil Spirits, <a href="#Page_78">78</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Sneezes (ceremony when a Moslem), <a href="#Page_95">95</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Solomon’s Judgment, Moslem version of, <a href="#Page_236">236</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Soudans, Two, <a href="#Page_305">305</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Standards and colours, an unfailing accompaniment of the Jinn army, <a href="#Page_89">89</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016"><em>Steingass</em> quoted, <a href="#Page_12">12</a>, <a href="#Page_15">15</a>, <a href="#Page_20">20</a>, <a href="#Page_50">50</a>, <a href="#Page_142">142</a>, <a href="#Page_152">152</a>, <a href="#Page_183">183</a>, <a href="#Page_206">206</a>, <a href="#Page_228">228</a>, <a href="#Page_242">242</a>, <a href="#Page_244">244</a>, <a href="#Page_245">245</a>, <a href="#Page_246">246</a>, <a href="#Page_253">253</a>, <a href="#Page_259">259</a>, <a href="#Page_260">260</a>, <a href="#Page_262">262</a>, <a href="#Page_265">265</a>, <a href="#Page_266">266</a>, <a href="#Page_267">267</a>, <a href="#Page_282">282</a>, <a href="#Page_289">289</a>, <a href="#Page_290">290</a>, <a href="#Page_291">291</a>, <a href="#Page_295">295</a>, <a href="#Page_301">301</a>, <a href="#Page_302">302</a>, <a href="#Page_304">304</a>, <a href="#Page_306">306</a>, <a href="#Page_307">307</a>, <a href="#Page_319">319</a>, <a href="#Page_320">320</a>, <a href="#Page_337">337</a>, <a href="#Page_338">338</a>, <a href="#Page_342">342</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Story of the First Lunatic (variants), <a href="#Page_49">49</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Striking palm upon palm,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> in sign of despair, <a href="#Page_252">252</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Subú (<em>Arab.</em>) for Yaum al-Subú = Septena-festival on the seventh day after a birth, marriage, or return from pilgrimage, <a href="#Page_122">122</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Sufrah = the cloth (<em>tr.</em> “table-cloth”), <a href="#Page_69">69</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Sufrah of leather = circular leather which acts as provision bag and table-cloth, <a href="#Page_162">162</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Sufrah umm jalájil (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>lit.</em> = an eating cloth with little bells, <a href="#Page_169">169</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Sujjádah = <em>lit.</em> a praying carpet (<em>tr.</em> “rug”), <a href="#Page_52">52</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Sultan and his Sons, etc.,” same as Scott’s “Story of the Three Princes, etc.”, <a href="#Page_244">244</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Sultan of Al-Yaman and his three Sons (<em>ver.</em> taken from Zotenberg’s “Chronique de Tabari”), <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Sultan of the Jánn preceded by sweepers; always appears in the form of second sight called by Egyptians “Darb al-Mandal,” <a href="#Page_45">45</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Supper comes first because the day begins at sundown, <a href="#Page_120">120</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Supper (“dinner after midnight”). See Shah’s diary (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_244">244</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Súsah (<em>Arab.</em>) = weevil, moth, worm, <a href="#Page_23">23</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Suwán” (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>lit.</em> = rock syenite, hard stone flint (<em>tr.</em> “mace”), <a href="#Page_24">24</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Symmetromania, Arab., <a href="#Page_67">67</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Tafazzal (<em>Arab.</em>), a useful word employed in invitations equiv. to “Have the kindness,” <a href="#Page_84">84</a>; <ul><li>Tafazzalú, <a href="#Page_233">233</a>.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c016">Tail, lashing his (lion’s), symptoms of rage distinguishing felines from canines, <a href="#Page_161">161</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Ta’kíl (<em>Arab.</em>) tying up a camel’s foreleg above the knee, <a href="#Page_23">23</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Tákiyah = Calotte or skull-cap, <a href="#Page_120">120</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Takrít, a town in Mesopotamia celebrated for its velvets, etc. (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_337">337</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Takruri = a Moslem negroid from Central and Western North Africa, <a href="#Page_298">298</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Tambúr der. from “Tabl” = a drum (hence modern “Tambour”), <a href="#Page_209">209</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Tamtar Aysh? (<em>Arab.</em>) <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> Ayyu Shayyin, “What do the skies rain!” 207.</li>
				<li class="c016">Tamím (<em>Arab.</em>) pl. of Tamímat = spells, charms, amulets, “Thummim”, <a href="#Page_332">332</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Tarábulus-town (also Atrábulus), arabisations of Tripolis, <a href="#Page_169">169</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Tarajjama, frequently used in this MS. (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_242">242</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Tarammá al-Mahramah (throwing the handkerchief) used in the old forms of choosing a mate, <a href="#Page_31">31</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Tari (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>lit.</em> = wet (<em>tr.</em> “soothing”), <a href="#Page_71">71</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Taylasán-hood, <a href="#Page_34">34</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Thayyib (<em>Arab.</em>) = a woman who has known man but once, <a href="#Page_333">333</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“The chick is unsatisfied till etc.” a translation which pre-supposes the reading “Farkhah lá atammat” and would require “hattà” or “ilà” to express “till” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_302">302</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“The Hoard hath gone from me, and I have waxed feeble,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> his strength was in the gold, <a href="#Page_347">347</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“The world was turned topsy-turvey,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> there was a great movement and confusion, <a href="#Page_262">262</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Three Sisters and their Mother, Defects in the Story of, <a href="#Page_165">165</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Throwing the kerchief (tarammá al Mahramah) used in the old form of choosing a mate, <a href="#Page_31">31</a>. <ul><li>See 264.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c016">“Thummim” <em>der. from</em> “Tôm” = completeness, <a href="#Page_332">332</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Thursday = pay day for the boys in Egypt, <a href="#Page_98">98</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Tigris, The (Hid-dekel), <a href="#Page_151">151</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Toilette, carrying a portable, <a href="#Page_303">303</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Tomb of the Moslem, <a href="#Page_293">293</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Turayyih (<em>mod. form for</em> “turawwih”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_301">301</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Turkish Tales by Petis de la Croix, <a href="#Page_13">13</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">’Úd Khayrazán = wood of the rattan, <a href="#Page_317">317</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Ummálí (<em>Arab.</em>); <em>gen.</em> Ummál, an affirmation (<em>tr.</em> “True indeed”), <a href="#Page_193">193</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Umm Kash’an, a slang name for Death, <a href="#Page_183">183</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Ummu ’Amrin = mother of ’Amru (slang term for “hyæna”), <a href="#Page_183">183</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Urím (lights) and Thummim (amulets), <a href="#Page_332">332</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Vellication (in cases of axilla-pile), <a href="#Page_153">153</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Viaticum = provision, provaunt for the way, <a href="#Page_304">304</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Virginity (how proved), <a href="#Page_121">121</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Wa adraka Shahrázáda’l-Sabáh = And Shahrazad <em>perceived</em> the dawn of day (also “was surprised by the dawn”), <a href="#Page_6">6</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Wa dazz-há (corruption in MS.) should read “wa wazzar-há” = “and he left her” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_314">314</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Wa Hakki man aulàní házá ’l-Mulk” = “and by the right of (my duty towards) Him who made me ruler over this Kingdom” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_307">307</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Wa jasad-hu yuhazdimu = his body was emitting blood freely (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_285">285</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Wakálah = a khan or caravanserai, <a href="#Page_38">38</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Wakíl (<em>Arab.</em>) = deputy—in marriage, <a href="#Page_333">333</a>, <em>lit.</em> = agent (<em>tr.</em> “trustee”) here corresponding with man who gives away the bride, <a href="#Page_54">54</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Wakt al-Zuhà (<em>Arab.</em>) = the division of time between sunrise and midday (<em>tr.</em> “undurn hour”), <a href="#Page_69">69</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Wa lákin hú ajmalu etc.” = “and yet he was more beautiful than they etc.” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_260">260</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Walásh (<em>Arab.</em>), <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, “Was lá shayya” = and nihil (<em>tr.</em> “Anaught”), <a href="#Page_210">210</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Wa’l-Sultánu karaa etc.” = “and the Sovran recited his appointed portion of the Koran, and then sat down to convivial converse” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_244">244</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Waraytaní ilà l-turáb = thou hast given me over to the ground for concealment (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_312">312</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Watukarribu ’l-’Abda ilayya (referring the verb to “Al-Sadakah” = the alms) = “and it bringeth the servant near to me” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_335">335</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Waybah = the sixth of an Ardabb (Irdabb) = 5 bushels, <a href="#Page_128">128</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Wa zarr-há” for “Wa dazz-há” = besprinkled her (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_314">314</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Wazíru ’l-’Arif bi-lláhi Ta’álà, Al- = The Wazir-wise-in-Allah-Almighty, <a href="#Page_239">239</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Wedding night, mothers tell their daughters what to expect, <a href="#Page_42">42</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Wept and laughed alternately (nearest approach in East. tales to West. hysterics), <a href="#Page_155">155</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Where is the bird?” = “How far is the fowl from thee?”, <a href="#Page_300">300</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“White” night, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> “pleasant,” “enjoyable,” <a href="#Page_285">285</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Wife” used for “Harím,” <a href="#Page_28">28</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Wonders of the (Moslem) World—four in number, <a href="#Page_36">36</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Wormwood, a regular Badawi remedy, <a href="#Page_343">343</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016"><cite>Wortley Montague MS.</cite> quoted, <a href="#Page_3">3</a>, <a href="#Page_6">6</a>, <a href="#Page_19">19</a>, <a href="#Page_35">35</a>, <a href="#Page_49">49</a>, <a href="#Page_74">74</a>, <a href="#Page_90">90</a>, <a href="#Page_95">95</a>, <a href="#Page_97">97</a>, <a href="#Page_101">101</a>, <a href="#Page_109">109</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Xerafim, <em>Port.</em> for Ashrafi, <a href="#Page_38">38</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">“Yá ’Arzád” prob. cler. slip for “’Urzát” (<em>pl. of</em> ’Urzah) = a companion, a (low) fellow, <a href="#Page_191">191</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Yá Házá (<em>Arab.</em>) = “Ho, this one,” <a href="#Page_231">231</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Yahjubu (<em>Arab.</em>) aor. of “hajaba” = he veiled, put out of sight (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_342">342</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Yá Jad’án” (more gen. “Yá Jad’a”) = mon brave, <a href="#Page_191">191</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Yakhburu ma’ahu fí ’l-Kalám” <em>lit.</em> = he experimented with him, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> he put him to the test (<em>tr.</em> “he spake with him softly”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_307">307</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Yaklishu (from ✔ Kulsh) = “kicking” (their heels), <a href="#Page_19">19</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Yanjaaru (<em>Arab.</em>) <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> form of “jaara,” in which the idea of “raising” seems to prevail, <em>tr.</em> “mounted,” <a href="#Page_311">311</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Yá Sallám” (<em>Arab.</em>) “O Saviour” addressed to Allah, <a href="#Page_63">63</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Yasrahú = roaming (<em>tr.</em> “rummaging”), <a href="#Page_19">19</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Yá Sultán-am” <em>Pers.</em> or <em>Turk.</em> form for Arab. “Yá Sultán-i” (“O my Sultan”), <a href="#Page_214">214</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Yatazáwadú (<em>Arab.</em>) = increasing (<em>tr.</em> “contending”), <a href="#Page_62">62</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Ya Tinjír (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>lit.</em> = O Kettle (<em>tr.</em> “O Miserable”), <a href="#Page_71">71</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Yauh! (<em>Arab.</em>) = “Alack!”, <a href="#Page_191">191</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Yaum al-Ahad = First day (which begins the Moslem week), <a href="#Page_341">341</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Yaum al-Jum’ah (<em>Arab.</em>) = Assembly-day, Friday, <a href="#Page_342">342</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Yaum al-Subú = 7th day, <a href="#Page_122">122</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Yá walad al-Halál = O thou true born son (or “O! Son of lawful wedlock,”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_267">267</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Young, a man is, in Arab speech, till forty or fifty, <a href="#Page_119">119</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Yufaghghiru = he opened his mouth wide (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_265">265</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Yughaffiru (probably for yu’affíru) = raising a dust cloud (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_265">265</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Yughaffiru wa yuzaghdimu = raising a dust cloud and trumpeting with rage, <a href="#Page_265">265</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">“Yumázasa-hu fí ’l-Kalám,” evidently a clerical error for “Yumárasa-hu,” = he tested or tried him in speech (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_307">307</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Yumkinshayy = “Is it possible,” <a href="#Page_232">232</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Yuzaghdimu, a quadriliteral formed by blending two tri-literals in one verb, to intensify the idea (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_265">265</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Zabh (Zbh) (<em>Arab.</em> ✔) = the ceremonial killing of animals for food, <a href="#Page_32">32</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Zadig (Tale of) 7.</li>
				<li class="c016">Zaghárit (<em>pl.</em> of Zaghrútah) = loud lullilooing, <a href="#Page_267">267</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Zahr (<em>Arab.</em>) lit. and generically a blossom (<em>tr.</em> “orange flower”), <a href="#Page_52">52</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Zahr al-Bahr = the surface which affords a passage to man, <a href="#Page_125">125</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Zakát = legal alms (<em>tr.</em> “poor-rates”), <a href="#Page_338">338</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Zamán, Al- (<em>tr.</em> “A delay”) prob. an error for “Yá al-Malik al-Zamán” = “O King of the Age,” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_319">319</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Zardakát (for “Zardakhán”) = silken napkins, <a href="#Page_55">55</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Zard-i-Kháyah (<em>Pers.</em>) = yoke of egg, <a href="#Page_56">56</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Zifr = nail, claw, talon, <a href="#Page_245">245</a>.</li>
				<li class="c016">Zill (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>lit.</em> = “Shadow me” (<em>tr.</em> “solace me”), <a href="#Page_58">58</a>.</li>
			</ul>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
