<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="volume-16" id="chapter-16-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Appendix II.<br/>
			<span class="large"><em>ALPHABETICAL TABLE OF THE NOTES</em> (<em>ANTHROPOLOGICAL, &amp;c.</em>)</span></h2>
			<ul class="c005 index">
				<li class="c029">“A King and no Army,” vi. 10.</li>
				<li class="c029">“A mighty matter” may also mean “A masterful man” (reading Imraan = man for Amran = matter), ii. 204.</li>
				<li class="c029">A’atú Al-Wírah = gave in their submission, v. 405.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— corresponds with Turk. “Wírah wírmek” = to capitulate (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 405.</li>
				<li class="c029">Abadan = never at all, iii. 52.</li>
				<li class="c029">Abadid (like Khadídán) non-significant, i. 103.</li>
				<li class="c029">Abárík (Al-), <em>pl.</em> of Ibrík, an ewer containing water for the Wuzu-ablution, ii. 170.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Abbás bin Mirdás (Chief of the Banu Sulaym) i. 40.</li>
				<li class="c029">Abbasides traced their descent from Al-Abbas, i. 14.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Abbús Al-, an intensive word meaning “Very stern faced,” vi. 232.</li>
				<li class="c029">Abd al-Malik bin Marwán (not to be confounded with the Caliph, the tenth of the series) vi. 179.</li>
				<li class="c029">Abd al-Malik bin Sálih, i. 159.</li>
				<li class="c029">Abdullah Chelebi, called in old translation “Scheffander-Hassan,” vi. 177.</li>
				<li class="c029">Abhak (composite word) i. 40.</li>
				<li class="c029">Abíkám = “Abicam,” a Chaldæan Astrologer (Chavis) and Abimacam (Gauttier) vi. 26.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ablution of whole body necessary after car. cop., v. 93.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ab o hawá = climate, iii. 362.</li>
				<li class="c029">Abraham (according to Jews and Christians emigrated to Harrán from “Ur of the Chaldees”) iii. 270.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (according to Moslem born in Harrán) iii. 269.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— the “Friend of Allah,” vi. 104.</li>
				<li class="c029">Absurdities to a European reader, are but perfectly natural to an Eastern coffee-house audience, v. 477.</li>
				<li class="c029">Abtál (<em>pl.</em> of Batal) = champions, athletes (<em>tr.</em> “braves”) ii. 42.</li>
				<li class="c029">Abtar = tailless (as applied to class of tales such as “Loves of Al-Hayfa and Yusuf”) v. 210.</li>
				<li class="c029">Abú al-Hasan (cleverness of) i. 30.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Hasan-al-Khalí’a, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, The Wag (old version “debauchee”) i. 1.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Tawáif (<em>pron.</em> “Abu tawáif”) the Father of the (Jinn-) tribes, ii. 84.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Antiká = father of antiquities (new noun in Arabic) iii. 11.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Hamámah = “Father of a Pigeon” (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, surpassing in swiftness the carrier pigeon) v. 380.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Ishák, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, Ibrahim of Mosul the Musician, i. 14.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Ja’dah = father of curls (=a wolf) iv. 14.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Kásim al-Tambúrí = Abú Kásim the Drummer, iv. 209.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Niyyah and Abu Niyyatayn, History of various versions of the names, iv. 334.</li>
				<li class="c029">Abú Nowás (appearing in The Nights, a signal for an outburst of obscenity), ii. 153.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Sábir = Father of the Patient (one), i. 81.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Sahíh = (flight to) a sure and safe place, vi. 149.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Sumayk = “Father of the Fishlet” (in old ver. “Yapousmek”) vi. 16.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Sumayk the Pauper, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “The Father of the little Fish,” vi. 15.</li>
				<li class="c029">Abúyah (a Fellah, vulg. for “Abí”) v. 418.</li>
				<li class="c029">Adab = accomplishments, ii. 68.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Adab” <em>translated</em> “Arabic,” i. 48.</li>
				<li class="c029">Adam’s Sons = a term that has not escaped ridicule amongst Moslems, iii. 149.</li>
				<li class="c029">Addíki = I will give thee (in the language of Fellahs) vi. 189.</li>
				<li class="c029">Address to inanimate object highly idiomatic and must be cultivated by practical Arabists, iii. 150.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Adu = an enemy (<em>tr.</em> “foe”) ii. 14.</li>
				<li class="c029">Adi (<em>Arab.</em>) = So it is, v. 448.</li>
				<li class="c029">Adí in Egypt. (not Arabic) is = that man, the (man) here, v. 118.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Adím al-Zauk (<em>Arab.</em>), <em>tr.</em> “Lack-tacts” = to our deficiency in taste, manners, etc. (Here denoting “practical joking”) v. 455.</li>
				<li class="c029">Adíní = Here am I, v. 118.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Adl (Al-) = the Notary, i. 219.</li>
				<li class="c029">Adoption of slave lads and lasses common among Moslems, i. 76.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Adrán (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>tr.</em> “Sheeted,” the ✓ being ’Adr = much and heavy rain, iv. 7.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Adúl = Assessors, i. 327.</li>
				<li class="c029">Áfák Al- (<em>pl.</em> of Uík) “elegant” for the universe (<em>tr.</em> “all the horizons”) v. 66.</li>
				<li class="c029">Afandiyah Al- (<em>Arab.</em>) = Efendis, iv. 41.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Afár, <em>tr.</em> “sand devils,” a word frequently joined with “Ghubár” = dust (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 262.</li>
				<li class="c029">Affidavit amongst Moslems, iii. 411.</li>
				<li class="c029">Afkah, a better Fakih or theologian, i. 244.</li>
				<li class="c029">Afrákh al-Jinn, <em>lit.</em> = Chicks of the Jinns (<em>tr.</em> “Babes of the Jinns”) v. 202.</li>
				<li class="c029">Afras = <em>lit.</em> a better horseman (<em>tr.</em> “doughtier”) ii. 105.</li>
				<li class="c029">Africa (<em>Arab.</em> “Afrikíyah”), here used for the limited tract about Carthage (Tunis), <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, Africa Propria, iii. 76.</li>
				<li class="c029">Aghá of the Janákilah = the Chief man (Aghá) of the Gypsies, iv. 72.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ágháwát (Aghas), meaning Eunuch officers and officials, iii. 112.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Ahádís” esp. referred to the sayings of Mahommed, vi. 41.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ahádís al-Kudus = sentences attributed to Archangel Gabriel, vi. 41.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Nabawí = the actual words pron. by Mahommed, vi. 41.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ahbábu-ná <em>pl. for sing.</em> = my beloved (<em>tr.</em> “my friends”) ii. 103.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ahmar = red, ruddy brown, dark brown, v. 347.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ahú ’inda-k, <em>tr.</em> “Whatso thou broughtest here it be” (Pure Fellah speech), v. 366.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— ma’í = “Here it is with me” (Pure Fellah speech), v. 265.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ahwas al-’Ansárí (Al-) (Al-Akhwass <em>Breslau Ed.</em>) i. 42.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ahyaf (alluding to Al-Hayfá) = (with waist full-) slight, v. 175.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Ahy Tys” for which read “Tuhà Tays” a general feast (Houdas), vi. 187.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Air hath struck me and cut my joints,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “I suffer from an attack of rheumatism” (common complaint in even the hottest climates), v. 160.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Ajáib (<em>pl.</em> of ’Ajíb) = “Marvellous!” (used in Pers. as well as Arab.) iii. 181.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ajal = the appointed day of death (<em>tr.</em> “appointed term”) i. 129.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Ajam = Barbarian-land, v. 213.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ajdár = Malady, vi. 162.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ajíjíyah, possibly Ajínniyah = a dish of dough, vi. 160.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Ajlan = a hasty man, i. 265.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ajr (Al-) = Heaven, i. 290.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Ajúz, a woman who ceases to have her monthly period (<em>tr.</em> “the old woman”) v. 52.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Ajúz nahs = a foul crone, i. 310.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Akákír (<em>pl.</em> of ’Akkár) = aromatic roots (<em>tr.</em> “simples”) i. 282.</li>
				<li class="c029">Akbá’ <em>pl.</em> of “Kub’” = in pop. language, any part of garment covering head (<span class="sc">St.</span>) vi. 48.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Akbá’ wa Zarábíl” <em>tr.</em> “Caps and slippers,” vi. 48.</li>
				<li class="c029">Akhaztu dam wajhhi-há (<em>Arab.</em>) = “I bled her of the hymeneal blood,” iv. 42.</li>
				<li class="c029">Akhbarú-hu (<em>Arab.</em>) = have given him (Yahyà) tidings, v. 156.</li>
				<li class="c029">Akhmitu Ghazla-há <em>lit.</em> = thicken her yarn or thread, i. 206.</li>
				<li class="c029">Akhyash Abná Sháh (second name may be “Shah of the Ebna” or Persian incolæ of Al-Yaman) vi. 12.</li>
				<li class="c029">Akík = carnelian stone, v. 130.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Al- (<em>Arab.</em>) = carnelian, v. 52.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Akíl, first cousin of Mahommed, ii. 164.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Akkada la-hu ráy,” plur. of “ráyat” = a banner, i. 137.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Akkál bula’hu” = commit all manner of abominations, vi. 70.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Akl (<em>Arab.</em>) = comprehension, understanding, iv. 193.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Akram” = the more generous (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 304.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Akrás al-Jullah,” <em>tr.</em> “dung cakes” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 292.</li>
				<li class="c029">Akwà min dahni’l-lauz = more strengthening than almond oil, ii. 75.</li>
				<li class="c029">Akyál, <em>pl.</em> of “Kayl” = Kings of the Himyarite peoples, vi. 232.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Ál bin Imrán” probably the name of some Prince of the Jinns, vi. 126.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Alà al-Kaylah = “the place where they usually slept the siesta,” i. 34.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Alà-Aklí, <em>tr.</em> “thou deservest naught for this,” v. 85.</li>
				<li class="c029">“’Alà bábi ’lláh” (<em>Arab.</em>) = for the love of the Lord, gratis, etc., a popular phrase (<em>tr.</em> “At the Gate of Allah Almighty”) iv. 138.</li>
				<li class="c029">“’Alà ghayri tarík” (<em>Arab.</em>) = “out of the way” (like <em>Pers.</em> “bí Ráh”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 224.</li>
				<li class="c029">A hámati-hi = “upon the poll of his head” (rendered here “upon the nape of his neck”) v. 191.</li>
				<li class="c029">Alà hudúd (or Alà hadd) al-Shauk (<em>Arab.</em>) = fulfilling all our desires, iv. 114.</li>
				<li class="c029">Alà kám (for “kam,” how much?) peasants’ speech, iv. 224.</li>
				<li class="c029">Alà kulli hál = “whatever may betide” or “willy nilly,” ii. 283.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Alà Tarík al-Satr wa al-Salámah,” meaning that each other’s wives did not veil before their brothers-in-law, i. 270.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Alá Yadín = Aláeddín, 265.</li>
				<li class="c029">Alaeddin, a favourite with the stage, iii. 51.</li>
				<li class="c029">Alaeddin, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> the “Height or Glory (’Alá) of the Faith (al-Din),” <em>pron.</em> Aláaddeen, iii. 51.</li>
				<li class="c029">“’Alái al-Din” = Alaeddin, vi. 50.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Alaka = he hung, iv. 149.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Alakah khárijah = an extraordinary drubbing, vi. 84.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Alam = a pile of stones (<em>tr.</em> a “mark”), i. 229.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Alam al-Din = “Flag of the Faith,” ii. 4.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Alamah = an undeflowered virgin, iii. 119.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Álamína (’Awálim) = the (three) worlds, vi. 249.</li>
				<li class="c029">Alaykum = “Peace be on you” (addressed to a single person) ii. 52.</li>
				<li class="c029">Alexander the Great = Lord of the Two Horns, iii. 148.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Alfi Hájatan” meaning “What dost thou want (in the way of amusement)? I am at thy disposal,” vi. 178.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Alhamdolillah = Glory be to God!” = grace after meat, iv. 337.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves (variants) iii. 369.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ali bin Ibrahim, “a faithful Eunuch” (Scott) v. 184.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ali, son-in-law of the Prophet (supposed author of Al-Jafr) vi. 168.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Al-’iddah,” term of widowhood of divorcée, pregnant woman, etc., vi. 178.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Alif, bá, tá, sá” (A.<abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr>D.). The latter written with a Sin instead of a Thá, showing vulg. use which extends from Alex. to Meccah, vi. 37.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Álim = a learned man, iii. 119.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Alkam = the bitter gourd, colocynth, ii. 218.</li>
				<li class="c029">Alkermes, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “Al-Kirm” (<em>Arab.</em> and <em>Pers.</em>) = a worm, cochineal, vi. 5.</li>
				<li class="c029">Allah (accomplish on them the ordinance of the Almighty) i. 100.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Allah! Allah!” here meaning “Haste! haste!” iv. 71.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = “I conjure thee by God,” v. 302.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Allah! Allah! sign of impatience) = Look sharp! i. 231.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Almighty hath done this = <em>here lit.</em> “hath given it to him,” v. 27.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (“An alms, for the love of”) ii. 44.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (and again by Allah) i. 9.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (be the judge between me and thee), ii. 52.</li>
				<li class="c029">Allah! (called upon to witness a lie) i. 261.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (decreed of old), ii. 90.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (do thou be steadfast of purpose and rely upon) = “Let us be off,” pop. parlance, v. 66.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (“Enter in the name of” = Bismillah), ii. 38.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Gifted of) ii. 200.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— háfiz-ik (<em>Arab.</em>) = the pop. <em>Pers.</em> expression, “Khudá Háfiz” (“Allah be thy safeguard”) iv. 218.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (in peace of) i. 6.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (I look to, for aid) ii. 202.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (“I seek refuge with,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, Allah forfend) ii. 9.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (I seek refuge with) = God forfend, i. 185.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (I will give him the covenant of) i. 179.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (is All-great) ii. 125.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (is threatening unbelievers) i. 51.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— kill all woman-kind,” v. 304.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (made easy to me) ii. 53.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Men who resign themselves to = <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, Moslems who practise the Religion of Resignation) ii. 271.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (name of, taken in vain) i. 87.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (O spirit of) i. 251.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (O worshipper of) (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “O Moslem, opposed to enemy of Allah) = a non-Moslem,” v. 460.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— openeth,” “Allah veileth,” civil forms of refusal, iv. 315.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (open to thee the door of subsistence) ii. 44.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Prince ’Ajíb forbidden to call upon name of), iii. 18.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (removed to the mercy of = he died) ii. 78.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— sent down a book confirmed,” a passage not Koranic, v. 47 (not a literal quotation, but alludes to Koran iii., 5) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 47.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Shadow of—a title of the Shah, iii. 531.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (sued for pardon of Almighty) a pious exclamation (“Astaghfiru ’llah”) v. 136.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Take refuge with, from the Evil eye of her charms) ii. 245.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (the peace of, be upon you and the ruth of Allah) i. 14.</li>
				<li class="c029">Allah (This is the deposit of, then thy deposit = “I commit him to thy charge under God”) ii. 184.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (while Almighty Allah willed) = a long time, i. 351.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (whom Allah save and assain) ii. 173.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— ya’tik = Allah will give it thee, (not I) ii. 44.</li>
				<li class="c029">Allah’s path (a Martyr on) = a Martyr of love, vi. 131.</li>
				<li class="c029">Alláho Akbar = God is most Great (war cry) v. 403.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Allazí ’amaltu fí-him, etc.” = Those to whom I did a good turn, requite me with the contrary thereof (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 253.</li>
				<li class="c029">Almahs (<em>fem.</em> of ’Álim = a learned man) = professional singing and dancing girls, iii. 119.</li>
				<li class="c029">Almás, <em>Arab.</em> (from <span xml:lang="grc">ἀδάμας</span>, and in <em>Hind.</em> “Hírá” and “Panná”) = diamond, iii. 354.</li>
				<li class="c029">Almond-Tree “Be not like unto the,” (a <i><span xml:lang="fr">lieu commun</span></i> in the East) vi. 7.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = the <em>Heb.</em> “Sháked” and the fruit is “Loz” (<em>Arab.</em> Lauz) = <em>Amygdalus communis</em>, vi. 7.</li>
				<li class="c029">Alms-gift = whatso exceedeth Viaticum (“Jáizah”), or the three days guest hospitality, vi. 26.</li>
				<li class="c029">Alwán, <em>pl.</em> of Laun, meats of all kinds and colours, vi. 122.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Amán” (<em>Arab.</em>) = quarter, mercy (<em>tr.</em> “safety”) iv. 30.</li>
				<li class="c029">Amán = Pardon (<em>lit.</em> “security”), i. 118.</li>
				<li class="c029">Amawi Mosque of Damascus, one of the four Wonders of the Moslem world, iv. 36.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Ambergris’d” coffee, sherbet, etc., (aphrodisiac) iii. 31.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Amil Rasad (<em>Arab.</em>) = <em>lit.</em>, acting as an observatory, iv. 341.</li>
				<li class="c029">Amín = Overseer, i. 67.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Hukm = “Faithful of Command,” ii. 7.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Al-) Sixth Abbaside <span class="fss"><abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr></span> 809–13, i. 175.</li>
				<li class="c029">Áminah, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, the secure (<em>fem.</em>) iii. 326.</li>
				<li class="c029">Amírala (wife of Emir-Ben-Hilac-Salamis) meaning, if anything, “Colonel” or Captain, R.N., vi. 225.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ammál (<em>Arab.</em>), vulg. written with initial Hamzah = “Verily”, “I believe you my boy” (<em>tr.</em> “Assuredly”), vi. 11.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Ammál (<em>Arab.</em>). With the Ayn may mean “he intended,” or “he was about to,” vi. 11.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Ammir = cause to flourish (<em>tr.</em> “Take and people”), i. 243.</li>
				<li class="c029">Amourist justified in obtaining his object by fair means or foul, i. 313.</li>
				<li class="c029">Amsaytu = I came at evening, i. 316.</li>
				<li class="c029">Amsik (<em>Arab.</em>), a “chaff” with the Turks—meaning cunnus-penis, iv. 93.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— lisána-k (<em>Arab.</em>) = “hold thy tongue,” iv. 93.</li>
				<li class="c029">’An Abí = (a propitiatory offering) for my father, i. 265.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Ana ’l-Tabib, al-Mudáwi” (<em>Arab.</em>) = I am the leach, the healer, v. 326.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Aná min ahli zálika,” <em>tr.</em> “I am of the folk of these things” (vulg. equiv. would be “Kizí,”) (for “Kazálika,” “Kazá”) = so (it is) v. 50.</li>
				<li class="c029">Anakati-h (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>tr.</em> “neck,” v. 427.</li>
				<li class="c029">Anbar (<em>tr.</em> “Ambergris”) ii. 67.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—And the Peace!” = “There is an end of the matter,” vi. 105.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Andalíb, nightingale, iii. 506.</li>
				<li class="c029">Andromeda and Perseus, Myth of, brought down to St. George and the Dragon, iv. 261.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Anfakati-h = the hair between the lower lips and the chin, also chin itself (<span class="sc">St.</span>), v. 427.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Anká (Al-) = <em>lit.</em> “The long-necked” (bird), ii. 128.</li>
				<li class="c029">Animals (lower) breeding with men, iv. 331.</li>
				<li class="c029">Anjar = a flat platter (<em>Pers.</em>) iv. 143.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Annus Domini” = Age (the worst disease in human life) iv. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ant, Koranic legend of the, vi. 99.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ant’ amilta maskhará (for maskharah) matah (for matà) idiomatical Fellah-tongue, v. 269.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— aysh (for “man” decidedly not complimentary) “What (thing) art thou?” v. 298.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Anta jáibb(un) bas rájul (an) wáhid (an)” = veritable and characteristic peasant’s jargon, v. 359.</li>
				<li class="c029">Antum fí Kháshin wa básh (an error for Khásh-másh) = a miserable condition, vi. 137.</li>
				<li class="c029">Anushirwán (in full Anúshínrawán) = sweet of soul, P.N. of Pers. King, vi. 44.</li>
				<li class="c029">Aorist, preceded by preposition “bi,” v. 432.</li>
				<li class="c029">Aphrodisiacs, iii. 133.</li>
				<li class="c029">Apocrypha, Tobias, etc., iv. 78.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Après moi le déluge,” ii. 123.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Arab al-’Arbá = Arabian Arabs, iii. 134.</li>
				<li class="c029">Arab al-Arbá = prehistoric Arabs, iii. 145.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— lovers jealous of their mistresses’ nightly phantom, ii. 179.</li>
				<li class="c029">——, of noble tribe, always first to mount his own mare, ii. 248.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Arabia Deserta” (Mr. Doughty’s) quoted v. 10, 53, 405.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Arafát, fête of; the day of the Sermon, when pilgrims sleep at Muzdalifah, vi. 41.</li>
				<li class="c029">Arafshah = superintendent, i. 20.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Arakiyah = Skull-cap, vi. 48.</li>
				<li class="c029">Arám (pl. of Irm), a beautiful girl, a white deer (<em>tr.</em> “Reems”) i. 43.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Aramramí = flocking and crowding, vi. 195.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ardabb (<em>prop.</em>) “Irdabb” = five bushels, iv. 290.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ardashir (King), son of Bábak, iii. 180.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Arghá” for “Arkhá” = he “brayed” (like an ostrich) for “his limbs relaxed,” iv. 31.</li>
				<li class="c029">Arja’ = <em>lit.</em> return (<em>tr. here</em> “Desist”) ii. 105.</li>
				<li class="c029">Armaghánát (<em>Arab.</em>) pl. of “Armaghán” (<em>Pers.</em>) a present, iv. 59.</li>
				<li class="c029">Arm-pit, Hair shaven or plucked from, iv. 153.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Arsah (<em>Arab.</em>) akin to Mu’arris = a pimp, a pander, iv. 208.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Arsh,” = the Ninth Heaven, v. 178.</li>
				<li class="c029">Arstable (astrolabe) iii. 159.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Art thou (Al-Hajjáj) from Cairo,” a neat specimen of the figure anachronism. (Al-Hajjáj died <abbr epub:type="se:era">AH</abbr> 95; Cairo built <abbr epub:type="se:era">AH</abbr> 358) v. 41.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Arús muhallíyah “a bride tricked out,” v. 468.</li>
				<li class="c029">Arwà written with a terminal yá is a woman’s P.N. in Arabic, i. 94.</li>
				<li class="c029">Arz (<em>Arab.</em>), from the <em>Heb.</em> “Arz” or “Razah” (✓ raz = to vibrate) = Cedar (of Lebanon), vi. 5.</li>
				<li class="c029">Arzi-há = in its earth, its outlying suburbs (<em>tr.</em> “Environs”) ii. 198.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Asá = Staff, one of the properties of Moslem Saints, iii. 183.</li>
				<li class="c029">“’Asá Fír,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> “Fír is rebellious,” vi. 102.</li>
				<li class="c029">’As’as = to complicate a matter, vi. 174.</li>
				<li class="c029">Asáfír, <em>pl.</em> of “’Usfúr” = a bird, a sparrow, vi. 102.</li>
				<li class="c029">Asáfírí (olives, etc.) iii. 405.</li>
				<li class="c029">Asár, clerical error for Sár = Vendetta, blood revenge, i. 134.</li>
				<li class="c029">Asfandíyâr = two heroes of the Shahnameh, both types of reckless daring, iii. 524.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Ashama, <em>lit.</em> = he greeded for, v. 285.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ashdak, usually applied to a wide-chapped face, iv. 91.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ashghaftíní (<em>see</em> Shaghaftíní) vi. 15.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ashírah = clan, ii. 225.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ashkhákh Al- (<em>Arab.</em>), <em>pl.</em> of Shakhkh = <em>lit.</em> the “Stales” (<em>tr.</em> “Skite and piss”) (Steingass reads “bi ’l-Shakhákh” the usual modern word for urine) v. 265.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ashkhás (<em>pl.</em> of Shakhs) = images = (<em>vulg.</em> used in Moslem realms in the sense of persons or individuals) iii. 12.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ashrafí (<em>Port.</em> Xerafim), a gold coin whose value has varied, iii. 294.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Asharah Mlah (Al) = ten times one, hundred, <i><span xml:lang="la">ib.</span></i> “one hundred for the (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, every) ten” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 28.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ashrafi, a gold coin of variable value, iv. 143; <ul><li>the Portuguese Xerafim, iv. 38.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c029">Ash-Shabakah bitáht al-Sayd = thy net for fishing, iv. 9.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Ashshár or Tither, i. 243.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ashur, four sons of (according to Arabs) vi. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Ásí (Al-) = rebel, syn. with Pers. “Yághí,” i. 134.</li>
				<li class="c029">Aská-hu ’alakah = gave him a sound drubbing (’alakah), vi. 58.</li>
				<li class="c029">Asmá al-Adwíyah = names of the medicines, i. 283.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ass (loan of) usually granted gratis in Fellah villages and Badawi camps, v. 460.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (the “cab” of modern Egypt), v. 281.</li>
				<li class="c029">Assemblage of dramatis personæ at end of a scene highly artistic and equally improbable, v. 31.</li>
				<li class="c029">Asshúr = Assyria, vi. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">Assyrian correspondence, the simplicity of, vi. 12.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Astaghfiru ’llah,” a pious exclamation, humbling oneself before the Creator (<em>tr.</em> “sued for pardon of Almighty Allah”) v. 136.</li>
				<li class="c029">Astrology and astronomy, iii. 159.</li>
				<li class="c029">Astrolabe (<em>tr.</em> “Astronomical-gear”) iii. 159.</li>
				<li class="c029">Asúr, in the text, “Atúr,” the scriptural “Asshur” = Assyria, vi. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">At her last breath, when cured by the magic of love, ii. 243.</li>
				<li class="c029">Athr = sign, mark, trail (<em>tr.</em> “Scar”) i. 280.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Atík = antique, iii. 11.</li>
				<li class="c029">Atrábulus (also Tarábulus), Arabisations of Tripolis, iv. 169.</li>
				<li class="c029">Atráf (pl. of “Tarf”) = great and liberal lords (<em>tr.</em> “chiefs”) i. 58.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Atrús, King (? Heron’s “Illabousatrous”) vi. 234.</li>
				<li class="c029">Attáf (named by Heron Chebib, also “Xakem Tai-Chebib” = Hátim Tayy Habíb), vi. 169.</li>
				<li class="c029">Attáf, Tale of (Cotheal MS.), vi. 196.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Tale of, title compared with Gauttier and Heron, vi. 167.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Atúr,” scriptural “Asshur” = Assyria, vi. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">Atwash (Al-) = one notable for levity of mind, ii. 16.</li>
				<li class="c029">Audáj (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>pl.</em> of “Wadaj,” applying indiscriminately to the carotid arteries and jugular veins, v. 340.</li>
				<li class="c029">Audán (<em>pl.</em> of the pop. “Widn” of “Wudn” for the literary “Uzn” = ear) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), v. 301.</li>
				<li class="c029">Aulád-i = sons (vulg. plural for dual), i. 132.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Aun, a high degree among the Jinns, a tribe of the Jinn, sometimes syn. with Márid, iv. 80, 302.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Aurat = nakedness, <em>tr.</em> “shame,” v. 75.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Ausaj = bushes, v. 456.</li>
				<li class="c029">Auzah (<em>Arab.</em>), a popular word in Egypt and Syria (<em>Pers.</em> “Oták,” and <em>Turk.</em> “Otah”) iv. 40.</li>
				<li class="c029">A’úzu bi ’lláhi min al-Sháytáni’l-Rajím = I take refuge with Allah against Satan the Stoned (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 242.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Awán <em>lit.</em> = aids, helpers (<em>tr.</em> “guards”), i. 253.</li>
				<li class="c029">Award o burd (Pers.) = brought and bore away, i. 210.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ay Ni’am (Yea, verily, Yes indeed), an emphatic and now vulgar expression, iii. 14, 31.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Ayn turned into H., <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, Bitáht for Bitá’at, iv. 9.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Ayoh” (in text), <em>tr.</em> “here he is”; a corr. of “Í (or Ayy) hú” = yes indeed he, v. 265.</li>
				<li class="c029">Aysh = Ayyu Shayyin, what? iv. 207.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (<em>Arab.</em>) = Ayyu Shayyin and Laysh = li ayyi Shayyin, a popular corruption of olden date, iii. 122.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— Khabara-k?” = how art thou? iii. 122.</li>
				<li class="c029">Aywah (different spelling for “aywa”) = “yes indeed,” or contraction for Ay (Í) wa ’lláhi = “yes, by Allah” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 265.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ayyám al-Nifás (<em>Arab.</em>) = the forty days after labour, during which a woman may not cohabit with her husband, iii. 502.</li>
				<li class="c029">“’Ayyik” or “Ayyuk” = a hinderer (of disease), vi. 174.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Ayyinah, probably a misreading for ’Ayniyyah = a sample, pattern (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 290.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Ayyúk = Capella, a bright star, vi. 174.</li>
				<li class="c029">Azán-hú = <em>lit.</em> “its ears” (<em>tr.</em> “its pegs”) ii. 159.</li>
				<li class="c029">Azay má tafút-ní? = how canst thou quit me? vi. 290.</li>
				<li class="c029">Azbad (<em>Arab.</em>) from ✓ Zbd (Zabd) = foaming, frothing, iv. 31.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Azlam” = the more iniquitous (<span class="sc">St.</span>), iv. 304.</li>
				<li class="c029">Azm = Koranic versets, which avert evil, vi. 19.</li>
				<li class="c029">Aznání = emaciated one, ii. 214.</li>
				<li class="c029">Azzamín = Charmers, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, men who recite the Azm, vi. 19.</li>
				<li class="c005">Baba Abdullah = Daddy Abdullah, iii. 311.</li>
				<li class="c029">Báb al-Nasr, the grand old Eastern or Desert-gate of Cairo, v. 457.</li>
				<li class="c029">Baba used in Pers., Turk., and Hindostan, for Dad! Dear! Child! iii. 311.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bábúj (from “Bábúg” from the <em>Pers.</em> “Pay-púsh” = foot-clothing), <em>tr.</em> “papoosh,” v. 442.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bábúk, or “Bábúnak” (<em>Pers.</em>) = the white Camomile flower, vi. 27.</li>
				<li class="c029">Backgammon = “(jeu de) dames,” a term of European origin, iii. 180.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bádám or Bídám (almond), used by way of small change, iii. 348.</li>
				<li class="c029">Badawí dogs dangerous, i. 316.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— tent, v. 116.</li>
				<li class="c029">Badr, Al- (<em>pl.</em> Budúr) = the “Full Moon,” v. 198.</li>
				<li class="c029">Badrah, <em>lit.</em> a myriad, ten thousand dirhams, i. 278.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (<em>Arab.</em>) = a purse of ten thousand dirhams, v. 58.</li>
				<li class="c029">Badr al-Budúr, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> Full moon of full moons, iii. 95.</li>
				<li class="c029">Badrat Zahab = a purse of gold (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 58.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bágh = Royal tiger, iii. 530.</li>
				<li class="c029">Baghdad (explained), iii. 25.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bahár = ox-eye, ii. 13.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (<em>Arab.</em>) often used for hot spices (<em>tr.</em> “pimento”), iv. 138.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bahlúl, a famous type of madman, v. 88.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Al- = the “Bahalul” of D’Herbelot, vi. 155.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bahluwán (Arab. for Pers. Pahluwán) = a brave, a warrior, i. 131.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bahman, meaning one of the Spirits that presides over beasts of burden, iii. 502.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bahr al-Azrak = the Blue Sea (Mediterranean) vi. 256.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Muhít (<em>Arab.</em>) = Circumambient Ocean, iv. 323.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bahrjaur (in Pers. Bahr-i-Jaur = luck of Jaur-city) i. 57.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bak’ah (=“a hollow where water collects”) and “Buk’ah” (=“a patch of ground”) compared, vi. 12.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bakar (Ox) and Taur (Bull) Moslem emblems of stupidity, ii. 178.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bakar = black cattle, whether bull, cow, or ox, vi. 136.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bakhshísh (written “Bakshísh” after Fellah-fashion) iv. 243.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bakht = luck, good fortune, iii. 331.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (i) Zamán (Persian) = Luck of the Time, i. 102.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bákiyah = may also mean Eternal, as opposed to Fániyah = temporal (<em>tr.</em> “abide”) i. 39.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bákúlat = pot-herbs (<em>tr.</em> “almond cakes”), probably clerical error for “Bakláwát,” i. 261.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bákúr = driving-sticks, v. 10.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bál (<em>Arab.</em>) sing. Bálah = a tale, iv. 210.</li>
				<li class="c029">Balass ruby = of rare wood, set with rubies, ii. 251.</li>
				<li class="c029">Balát = the flags (slabs of limestone and sandstone) ii. 21.</li>
				<li class="c029">Baliyah = bane and bale (to jingle with “Bábiliyah”) ii. 153.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ballát, limestone, slabs cut in the Torah quarries south of Cairo, v. 80.</li>
				<li class="c029">Baltah, for Turk. “Báltah” = an axe, a hatchet, v. 336.</li>
				<li class="c029">Baltah-ji, a pioneer, one of the old divisions of the Osmanli troops, surviving as a family name amongst Levantines, v. 336.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bámiyah = Gumbo, etc., of Brit. India (<em>tr.</em> “rose-mallows”) iv. 243.</li>
				<li class="c029">Banát al-hawá = <em>lit.</em> daughters of love (<em>tr. here</em> “a merry girl”) ii. 137.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bandukah = a little bunduk, nut, bullet, (<em>tr.</em> “degrees”) i. 353.</li>
				<li class="c029">Banj akrítashí = Cretan Bhang, i. 9.</li>
				<li class="c029">Banj al-tayyar, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, volatile = that which flies fastest to the brain (<em>tr.</em> “flying Bhang”) v. 26.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bánú = a lady, a dame of high degree, iii. 419.</li>
				<li class="c029">Banú Adam = Sons of Adam (as opposed to Banú Elohim = Sons of the Gods) iii. 88.</li>
				<li class="c029">Banú al-Asfar = Sons of the yellow (Esau’s posterity in Edom) iii. 88.</li>
				<li class="c029">Banú al-Khashkhash = Sons of the (black) poppy (viz. Ethiopians) iii. 88.</li>
				<li class="c029">Banú Ghálib, v. 43</li>
				<li class="c029">Banú Hilál, a famous tribe, vi. 225.</li>
				<li class="c029">Banú Shaybán = the King’s own tribe, ii. 199.</li>
				<li class="c029">Banú Tay, the tribe of the chieftain and poet Hátim Táí, i. 179.</li>
				<li class="c029">Banú Thakíf, a noble tribe sprung from Iyád, v. 46.</li>
				<li class="c029">Barári or deserts, ii. 16.</li>
				<li class="c029">Barbarians (Matthew Arnold’s) iv. 280.</li>
				<li class="c029">Barbasa (with dental sibilant “Sín”) = he sought, looked for (with palatial sibilant “Sád”) = he watered the ground abundantly (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 291.</li>
				<li class="c029">Barbastu = besmeared, iv. 291.</li>
				<li class="c029">Barber, being a surgeon ready to bleed a madman, v. 277.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— the usual operator in circumcision, ii. 116.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bardawán, the well-known city in Hindostan whose iron was famous, vi. 71.</li>
				<li class="c029">Barniyah = Pot (in which manna was collected) i. 265.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Bartamán” for “Martaban” = a pot, jar, etc. (<em>tr.</em> “a crock”) iv. 204–223.</li>
				<li class="c029">Báshá (<em>Arab.</em> form of <em>Turk.</em> “Pasha”) derivation, iv. 137.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Bashákhín,” <em>pl.</em> of “Bashkhánah” = hangings, arras, vi. 44.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bashárah, can hardly be applied to ill news (faulty text), i. 34.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bashárah, Al- (<em>Arab.</em>) = a gift of good news, iv. 307.</li>
				<li class="c029">Basíl, son of “Ashur,” vi. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bashkhánah (corr. of <em>Pers.</em> “Peshkhánah = state-tents sent forward on march”) <em>tr. here</em> “a hanging,” v. 131.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— custom of, among Eastern Moslems, v. 106.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bashkhánah (Al-) = the Curtain, ii. 165.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bassorah-city = “Balsorah” (Galland), “Bansrá” (H.V.) iii. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bast, a preparation of Bhang (<em>Cannabis sativa</em>) iv. 19.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bastinado used to extort confession, i. 148.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bát (for “Bit”) = Pass the night here (in Fellah speech) iv. 246.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = “the night has passed” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 246.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bathá = lowlands and plains outside Meccan Valley, i. 42.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bathah = inner court, i. 284.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bathing after copulation kept up by both sexes in ancient Rome, ii. 142.</li>
				<li class="c029">Batiyah (<em>Arab.</em>) gen. = a black jack, a leathern flagon (<em>tr.</em> “Keg”) iv. 125.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bayt al-Mukaddas = Sanctified House, iii. 407.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bazzistán (<em>Arab.</em>-<em>Pers.</em>) = market-place for Bazz = cloth, iii. 431.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bawwábah Al = a place where doorkeepers meet, a police-station (<em>tr.</em> “guard-house”) v. 309.</li>
				<li class="c029">Baybúnah (<em>prop.</em> “Bábúnaj” in <em>Arab.</em>, and “Bábúk” in <em>Pers.</em>) = the white Camomile flower, vi. 27.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bayn farsi-k wa ’l-damí = <em>lit.</em> between fœces and menses (<em>tr.</em> “thy droppings and drippings”) i. 41.</li>
				<li class="c029">Baysár or Baysárah, a dish peculiar to Egypt = beans seasoned with milk and honey, iv. 176. Also “Baysár” or “Faysár,” iv. 291.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bayzah (<em>Arab.</em>) = an egg, a testicle, v. 360.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bazaka = brought out, i. 209.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Bean and ’twas split, A,” proverb suggesting “<span xml:lang="la">par nobile fratrum</span>,” iii. 179.</li>
				<li class="c029">Beating the bosom with a sunbaked brick, i. 34.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bed (on roof) made of carpet or thin mattress strewn upon the stucco flooring of the terrace roof, v. 219.</li>
				<li class="c029">Beef, causes dysenteric disease, v. 51.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bell as a fringe to the Ephod of High Priest, vi. 100.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bel the idol (or Ba’al or Belus, the Phœnician and Canaanite head-god) vi. 26.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bghb (evidently for “Baght,” or preferably “Baghtatan”) vi. 78.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bhang-eaters, indecencies of, iv. 196.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Bi,” the particle proper of swearing, v. 470.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bí-adabí = being without Adab, (means rudeness, etc.) ii. 68.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bi al-Salám = in the Peace (of Allah) i. 6.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Bi Asri-hi” (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>lit.</em> “rope and all;” metaphorically used = altogether entirely (<em>tr.</em> “the World universal”) vi. 108.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bibars (<em>pron.</em> “Baybars”) ii. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Bí, Bí, Bí,” compare the French “Brr”, vi. 77.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bid’ah = <em>lit.</em> an innovation, a new thing (<em>tr. here</em> “accursed custom”) ii. 266.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bíhkamál (Pers. and Arab.) = “Good Perfection,” i. 107.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bihkard = “Well he did,” i. 107.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bihzad (Persian) = Bih (well, good) Zád (born) i. 89.</li>
				<li class="c029">Biiru-milyánah Moyah (with various forms of “Moyah”) v. 323.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Bi-izá-humá” <em>lit.</em> vis-à-vis to the twain, v. 69.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bi jildi ’l-bakar = a cow hide, ii. 96.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bi-Khátiri-k = Thy will be done (<em>tr.</em> “At thy pleasure”), v. 322.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Bilád al-Maghrib (al-Aksa” in full) = the Farthest Land of the Setting Sun (<em>tr.</em> “Sundown-Land”) ii. 252.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bilal = moisture, beneficence, etc., i. 40.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Bilám” here = the headstall of the bridle (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 381.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Billáhi,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “by Allah,” v. 470.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bilisht = The long span between thumb-tip and minimus-tip, iii. 353.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Bi-Má al-fasíkh ’alà Akrás al-Jullah” (<em>tr.</em> “Save with foul water upon the disks of dung”) v. 292.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bímáristán (<em>Arab.</em> from <em>Pers.</em>) = a “sick house”, hospital, madhouse, iv. 48.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bir al-Khátim = Well of the signet, i. 165.</li>
				<li class="c029">Birkah = a fountain basin, lake, pond, reservoir (<em>tr.</em> “hole”) v. 117.</li>
				<li class="c029">Birkat Far’aun = Pharaoh’s Pool, vi. 98.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bi-sab’a Sikak = <em>lit.</em> “with seven nails” (meaning here posts whereto chains were attached) v. 380.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bisáta-hum = their carpets (<em>tr.</em> “warehouses”) vi. 124.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bishangarh, iii. 422.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bishr and Hind (two well-known lovers), ii. 211.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Bismillah” = Enter in the name of Allah, ii. 38.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bísmillah = grace before meat, iv. 337.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Bismillah; in the name of the Lord” = “Let us go,” etc., ii. 85.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bisnagar (corruption of Sanskrit Vijáyanagara = City of Victory) iii. 422.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bitá’i (<em>Arab.</em>) = my own, iv. 9.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Bi-Wujúh al-Fániját al-Miláh” (reading “al-Ghániját” in app. with “al-Miláh”), render “the faces of the coquettish, the fair” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 80.</li>
				<li class="c029">Biyarza’ fí Asábí-hi (only instance in MS. where the aorist is preceded by preposition “bi”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 432.</li>
				<li class="c029">Blackening faces a promise of Hell-fire, ii. 42.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bloody sweat, v. 149.</li>
				<li class="c029">Blood-feuds troublesome to travellers, ii. 222.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Blood hideth not from blood” (<em>equiv. to</em> Scotch “Blood is thicker than water”) iii. 54.</li>
				<li class="c029">Blood moved between them (a “pathetic fallacy”) i. 77.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— red tears, v. 149.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— revenge religiously laudable, iii. 180.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— speaking to blood,” popular superstition, excusing unwarrantable liberties in Royal personages, iii. 531.</li>
				<li class="c029">Blowing a man up with bellows, i. 351</li>
				<li class="c029">Book of Bakhtyár (Persian Bakhtyár Námeh) “The ten Wazirs, etc.,” i. 55.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bostán al-Nuzhah = the Garden of Pleasance, i. 29.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bráhmani = Hindu, Indian, ii. 111.</li>
				<li class="c029">Brain-pans (good old classical English) v. 219.</li>
				<li class="c029">Branchlet = a youth’s bending form, ii. 162.</li>
				<li class="c029">Breslau Edition quoted, i. 1, 4, 15, 25, 39, 42, 47, 51, 55, 58, 60, 121, 131, 134, 159, 165, 171, 175, 179, 185, 191, 266, 334, 359; ii. 3, 54, 55, 63, 67, 151, 183, 191, 259, 263, 275; iii. 51; v. 117, 118, 419.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bribing the Kazi’s wife, v. 364.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bridegroom offers coffee and Halwá to friends after a “happy night,” ii. 142.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bridge at Baghdah made of the ribs of Og bin ’Unk (=Og of the Neck) iii. 19.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— of Sanjia in Northern Syria is one of the four Wonders of the Moslem world, iv. 36.</li>
				<li class="c029">Brow white as day and hair black as night (common conceit) iii. 96.</li>
				<li class="c029">Brutality of a Moslem mob, ii. 168.</li>
				<li class="c029">Buk’ah (=“a piece of low ground”) and Bak’ah (=“a hollow where water collects”) compared, vi. 12.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bukhári = a place for steaming, iii. 355.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bakhtí = The Bactrian or double-humped dromedary, ii. 235.</li>
				<li class="c029">Buksumah (<em>Arab.</em>) = “hard bread” (<em>tr.</em> “biscuit”) iv. 169.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bulaybul (Al-) = the little nightingale, Philomelet, iv. 245.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bulbul-i-hazár-dástán (<em>Arab.</em>), usually shortened to “Hazár” = bird of a thousand tales = the Thousand, in Arab. called ’Andalíb, iii. 506.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Bull- (Taur for Thaur or Saur)—numbered-and-for-battle-day-lengthened” (<em>tr. The Bull-aye-ready-and-for Battle-aye-steady</em>) v. 160.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bull used in the East to turn the mill and water-wheel, iv. 294.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bundukáni (Al-) = the cross-bow or pellet-bow man, vi. 53.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bunduki (adj. of Bunbuk) = Venetian, ii. 204.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bunúd (pl. of Pers. “band”) = hypocrisy, deceit (<em>tr.</em> “quiddities”) i. 353.</li>
				<li class="c029">Burd (<em>pl.</em> of Burdah) = mantle or woollen plaid of striped stuff, v. 42.</li>
				<li class="c029">Burka’ = the face veil of Egypt, etc., ii. 172.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = Nosebag, v. 91.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— veil or “Nosebag,” iv. 282.</li>
				<li class="c029">Burúj (pl. of Burj) = <em>lit.</em> towers (<em>tr.</em> “mansions”) i. 353.</li>
				<li class="c029">Búsah (doubtful meaning), possibly reed used as a case or sheath (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 108.</li>
				<li class="c029">But-Khánah = idol house, <em>syn.</em> with But-Kadah = image cuddy (<em>tr.</em> “Pagodas”) iii. 427.</li>
				<li class="c029">Búyúrdi, Al- (<em>cler. error</em> for “Buyúruldi”) = the written order of a Governor, vi. 180.</li>
				<li class="c029">“By the life of my youth,” a “swear” peculiarly feminine, and never used by men, v. 85.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bye Names, vi. 84.</li>
				<li class="c029">Byron in England, v. 274.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bystanders excited about some matter in no way concerning them, i. 303.</li>
				<li class="c005">Cafilah, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, caravan, iv. 222.</li>
				<li class="c029">“——” (Shaykh of) for Cafila, v. 419.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Cage of Clapham,” iii. 501.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cairo (magnificent city of Egypt), iii. 58.</li>
				<li class="c029">Calcutta Edition quoted, ii. 137, 141.</li>
				<li class="c029">Caliph can do no wrong, i. 167.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Omar bin Abd al-Aziz (The Good Caliph) i. 39.</li>
				<li class="c029">Caliphs under the early Ommiades, v. 39.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Camaralzaman” (olden versions) = “Complete Time,” for “Moon of the Age,” vi. 233.</li>
				<li class="c029">Camel (not customary to mount lady upon in India) iii. 294.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (“Ushtur” or “Unth”) iii. 294.</li>
				<li class="c029">Camels made drunk with Bhang, or Indian hemp, to make extended marches, vi. 244.</li>
				<li class="c029">Camel’s pasture divided into “Khullah” (Sweet food called bread) and “Hámiz” termed fruit, iv. 7.</li>
				<li class="c029">Camomile flower (white), vi. 27.</li>
				<li class="c029">Camphor, use of, iii. 361.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Can play with the egg and the stone,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “can play off equally well the soft-brained and the hard-brained,” v. 277.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cap of the “Sútarí” or jester of the Arnaut (Albanian) regiments, v. 276.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— worn by professional buffoon, v. 276.</li>
				<li class="c029">Carpet (the Flying), prototype of, iii. 425.</li>
				<li class="c029">Carrion (animals that died without being ceremonially killed) ii. 175.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cat, a sacred animal amongst the Egyptians, vi. 31.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cedar of Lebanon, vi. 5.</li>
				<li class="c029">Census of the Exodus (Exposition by Mr. Thayer), vi. 113.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— should not be made without direct command of Creator (superstitious idea) iv. 308.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Chafariz” (fountain) of Portugal (der. from Sakáríj) v. 5.</li>
				<li class="c029">Chamber (a dangerous word in English) ii. 129.</li>
				<li class="c029">Change from first person into third, looseness of style in the MS. (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 282.</li>
				<li class="c029">Changes, contradictions and confusions inherent in Arab. stories, iii. 93.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Changul” (with three dotted Chím) = red gold, vi. 251.</li>
				<li class="c029">Chapter of the Cow (Koran) ii. 175.</li>
				<li class="c029">Chaugán (Persian) = the crooked bat used in polo, i. 109.</li>
				<li class="c029">Chavis quoted, vi. 12, <i><span xml:lang="la">ib.</span></i> 15, 16, 53, 54, 56, 59, 63, 68, 72.</li>
				<li class="c029">Chavis and Cazotte quoted, i. 55, 60, 65, 73, 81, 89, 94, 95, 97, 102, 103, 107, 112, 121, 131, 147, 151; iv. 49, 64, 66; v. 27.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cheek, he set his right hand upon, meaning he rested his cheek upon his right hand, v. 9.</li>
				<li class="c029">Chenery quoted, iv. 7; vi. 7, 54, 73, 84, 89, 94, 97, 124, 159, 183, 225, 241.</li>
				<li class="c029">Chess rarely played for money in Europe, ii. 205.</li>
				<li class="c029">Chhuchhundar, <em>Hind.</em> (<em>Sorex cœrulescens</em>) = musk-rat, iii. 500.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Chifte,” from <em>Pers.</em> “Juft” = a pair, any two things coupled together (<span class="sc">St.</span>) vi. 67.</li>
				<li class="c029">Child-bed customs amongst Moslems, iv. 177.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Children” used for fighting men, ii. 224.</li>
				<li class="c029">China = the normal Oriental “despotism, tempered by assassination,” iii. 164.</li>
				<li class="c029">Chob-dár = rod-bearer, mace-bearer, usher, etc., iii. 125.</li>
				<li class="c029">Church of Rohah (Edessa), one of the four Wonders of the Moslem world, iv. 36.</li>
				<li class="c029">Circumcision, ii. 90.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Jewish rite), must always be performed by the Mohel, an official of the Synagogue, v. 217.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— three operations of, v. 217.</li>
				<li class="c029">Circumstantial (affecting the), a favourite manœuvre with the Ráwí, v. 233.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— evidence not lawful amongst Moslems, i. 112.</li>
				<li class="c029">Circus tricks with elephants, horses, etc., iii. 430.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cistern or tank in terrace-roof of Syrian houses, v. 246.</li>
				<li class="c029">Citadel of Lead = Capital of King Al-Shisban, ii. 117.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cloud (which contains rain) always typical of liberality and generous dealing, v. 179.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— of Locusts believed by Arabs to be led by a King locust (the Sultan Jarád) i. 305.</li>
				<li class="c029">Chronique de Tabari quoted, iv. 3–5.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cob-houses, iv. 214.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cock and the Fox (Fable of whose moral is that the biter is often bit) vi. 145.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cock-speak = a natural clock called by West Africans Cokkerapeek, i. 10.</li>
				<li class="c029">Coffee, iv. 198.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— and sherbet, mention of, makes the tale synchronous with that of Ma’arúf, or the xvii. century, iv. 55.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— and smoking, v. 236.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cohen = a priest either of the true God or of false gods, vi. 109.</li>
				<li class="c029">Coinage of Baghdad, iii. 294.</li>
				<li class="c029">Concealments inevitable in ancient tale or novel, v. 417.</li>
				<li class="c029">Conclusions of Tales compared, iii. 303.</li>
				<li class="c029">Condition of forfeits (<em>lit.</em> order and acceptance), i. 175.</li>
				<li class="c029">Confections, or sweetmeats used by way of restoratives in the Bath, iv. 56.</li>
				<li class="c029">Conjuration, a specimen of Islamised Mantra (in Sanskrit “Stambhaná”) intended to procure illicit intercourse, vi. 126.</li>
				<li class="c029">Connexion of Beasts with Humans, and consequences thereof, iv. 331.</li>
				<li class="c029">Conundrum or riddle, vi. 97.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cook and Cooking, Egyptian or Syrian compared with English, iv. 174.</li>
				<li class="c029">Corpse sprinkled with water, etc., iv. 257.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cossid (<em>Arab.</em> Kásid), an Anglo-Indian term = a running carrier, iv. 123.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cotheal MS. quoted, vi. 167, 168, 169, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 179, 181, 184, 186, 192.</li>
				<li class="c029">Couch of Circumcision, ii. 111.</li>
				<li class="c029">Couplets rhyming in “—ání” and “—álí” not lawful, v. 128.</li>
				<li class="c029">Courser, rubbing his cheeks upon his master’s back and shoulders, v. 405.</li>
				<li class="c029">Court of Baghdad was, like the Urdú (Horde or Court) of “Grand Mogul,” organised after the ordinance of an army in the field, vi. 81.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Cousin” more polite than “wife,” vi. 188.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cramoisy (dressed from head to foot in), a royal sign of wrath denoting torture or death, iv. 63.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cranes of Ibycus, ii. 59.</li>
				<li class="c029">Crepitus ventris, iv. 231.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Cried out from her head” = Sang in tenor tones which are always in falsetto, ii. 238.</li>
				<li class="c029">Crows, audacious, and dangerous to men lying wounded, iii. 344.</li>
				<li class="c029">Crucifixion, vi. 261.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— by nailing to an upright board, ii. 49.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cuckold, origin of, i. 205.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cuddy, <em>der. from Pers.</em> “Kadah” = a room, v. 24.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cup-companions = the professional Ráwís or tale reciters, ii. 266.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Cut the way” = became a highwayman, i. 90.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cutting the way (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, waylaying travellers) i. 60.</li>
				<li class="c029">Curiosity (playing upon the bride’s) = a favourite topic in Arab. and all Eastern folk-lore, v. 443.</li>
				<li class="c029">Crystalline Isles, vi. 234.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cynocephalus famed for venery, iv. 333.</li>
				<li class="c005">Dabbah = wooden bolt, v. 265.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dabbús = a mace, i. 95.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— bazdaghání (trans. as if from <em>Pers.</em> “Bazdagh” = a file) <em>tr.</em> a “file-wrought mace,” vi. 71.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dabdihkán, a physician (Cotheal MS.) vi. 174.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dabshalímat = the Dabshalíms, the dynastic title of the Kings of Somanáth in Western India, vi. 23.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dád-bín (Persian) = one who looks to justice, i. 94.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dahab ramli (<em>Arab.</em>) = gold-dust washed out of the sand, <em>placer</em>-gold (<em>tr.</em> “pure sand-gold”) iii. 126.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dáhiyat al-Dawáhí = a calamity of the Calamities, ii. 119.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dahmár (King) called by Scott “Rammaud,” v. 105.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dahn (<em>Arab.</em>) = oil, ointment (<em>tr.</em> “sweetest unguent”), vi. 10.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dainty food (Egyptian or Syrian Cook compared with English) iv. 174.</li>
				<li class="c029">Daïs (place of honour) i. 16.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dajlah River (Tigris), vi. 122.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dakhlah Al- (<em>Arab.</em>) = the night of going in, iv. 42.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dallál = broker (same as Sáhib = owner), iv. 224.</li>
				<li class="c029">Damascus City (<em>der.</em> from Dimishk) called Shám (Cotheal MS.) vi. 167.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dán (with dual Dánayn) and “Wudn” (with plural “Audán”) are pop. forms for literary “Uzn” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) vi. 245.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Al- (cler. error for Al-Uzn = ear), vi. 245.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dáúnk (Pers. “Dáng”) = one-sixth of a dirham, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, about a penny halfpenny, i. 245.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dann = Amphora (<em>Gr.</em> <span xml:lang="grc">ἀμφορεύς</span> short for <span xml:lang="grc">ἀμφιφορεύς</span> = having two handles), <em>tr.</em> “two-handed jar,” v. 198.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dara’ or Dira’ = armour (<em>tr.</em> “jerkin,”) ii. 209.</li>
				<li class="c029">Darabukkah-drum (or “tom-tom”) v. 13.</li>
				<li class="c029">Darajah = an instant; also a degree (of the Zodiac) <em>tr.</em> “one watch.”</li>
				<li class="c029">—— is also used for any short space of time (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 90.</li>
				<li class="c029">Darajatáni (<em>Arab.</em>), <em>lit.</em> = two astronomical degrees (<em>tr.</em> “a couple of hours”) iv. 110.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dár al-Salám = Abode of Peace, i. 11.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dár al-Ziyáfah (in Northern Africa) = kind of caravanserai in which travellers are lodged at Government expense, v. 330.</li>
				<li class="c029">Darb = <em>lit.</em> a road (<em>tr.</em> “street”) ii. 8.</li>
				<li class="c029">Darbálah (<em>Arab.</em>), corresponding with <em>Egypt.</em> “Darábukkah,” a tabor of wood or earthenware (<em>tr.</em> “little drum”) iv. 43. Also part of the regular Darwaysh’s begging gear, iv. 43.</li>
				<li class="c029">Darb al-Mandal (<em>Egypt.</em>) = Striking the magic circle in which enchanter sits when he conjures up spirits (a form of second sight) iv. 45.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Záji = the street of the copperas-maker, vi. 60.</li>
				<li class="c029">Darbár (<em>Hind.</em>), term for Royal Levée = Selám (<em>Pers.</em>) iii. 451.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Darbisí al-báb” (from the <em>Pers.</em> “Darbastan” = to tie up, to shut), <em>tr.</em> “Do thou bar,” vi. 69.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Darín” for “Zarín” = what is powdered, collyrium, v. 111.</li>
				<li class="c029">Darwaysh (<em>Pers.</em>), <em>pron.</em> by Egyptians “Darwísh,” iii. 313.</li>
				<li class="c029">Darwayshah (<em>Arab.</em>) = a she-Fakir (<em>tr.</em> “religious mendicant”) iv. 217.</li>
				<li class="c029">Darwayshes suspected of kidnapping, iv. 153.</li>
				<li class="c029">Daryábár, <em>der.</em> from “Daryá,” the sea, and “bar” = a region, iii. 281.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (<em>Pers.</em> = the ocean land), a fancy name for a country, iii. 281.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dashísh (<em>Arab.</em>), <em>tr.</em> “flour” (<em>Dicts.</em> make “wheat broth to be sipped”) v. 347.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Dasht-i-lá-siwá-Hú” = a desert wherein is none save He (Allah), a howling wilderness, iii. 284.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dastí = thou trampledst, i. 146.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dastúr! = by your leave (<em>Pers.</em>), vi. 58.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dates and cream (“Proud rider on the desired steed”) i. 59.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dáúd = David, vi. 229.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Daughter shall be in his name” = betrothed to her, iii. 110.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Daughters” secondary figures in geomancy, “mothers” being primary, iii. 156.</li>
				<li class="c029">Daur al-Ká’ah = the opening made in the ceiling for light (<em>tr.</em> “the opening of the saloon”) ii. 23.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dawát = ink-case (containing the reed-pens) ii. 211.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dani = an echo, iv. 273.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dawn-prayer, i. 13.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Day in the Country,” an old Eastern custom, iv. 96</li>
				<li class="c029">Daylakí = Daylakian (garments), v. 143.</li>
				<li class="c029">Daylam (Al-) prison, ii. 142.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dayr al-Tin = “The Convent of Clay,” a Coptic Monastery near Cairo, ii. 284.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Nashshábah = the Monastery of the Archers (a fancy name) v. 129.</li>
				<li class="c029">Days in Moslem year 354 (=6 months of 29 days and the rest of 30) i. 245.</li>
				<li class="c029">Death and Life are states, not things, vi. 103.</li>
				<li class="c029"><i><span xml:lang="la">Decies repetitæ</span></i>, forms which go down with an Eastern audience, but intolerable to a Western reader, v. 170.</li>
				<li class="c029">Defloration, regarded by many ancient peoples as if it were porters’ work, iv. 57.</li>
				<li class="c029">Delights of Paradise promised by the Prophet, ii. 244.</li>
				<li class="c029">De Sacy quoted, vi. 65, 160.</li>
				<li class="c029">Descended = Come down from Heaven, i. 333.</li>
				<li class="c029">Destiny, ii. 61.</li>
				<li class="c029">Devil may not open a door shut in Allah’s name, i. 21.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Dhobí-ká kuttá, na Ghar-ká na Ghátká” (Hindí saying) = a washerman’s tyke, nor of the house nor of the Ghátdyke, iii. 491.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dhol = drums, iii. 137.</li>
				<li class="c029">Diamond does not grow warm whilst held in the hand, i. 215.</li>
				<li class="c029">Diamonds, iii. 354.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Diapedesis” of blood-stained tears frequently mentioned in the “Nights,” v. 149.</li>
				<li class="c029">Died of laughter (now become familiar to English speech), i. 13.</li>
				<li class="c029">Die thou and be thou an expiation for the shoe-latchet of Kilayb, ii. 263.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dignity, permissible in royalty, affected by dames in Anglo-Egypt, ii. 110.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dihkán, in Persian = a villager (<em>tr.</em> “village-headman”) i. 81.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dijlah Al- = The Tigris (Hid-dekel) iv. 151.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dilk (<em>Arab.</em>) more commonly “Khirkah” = tattered robe of religious mendicant (<em>tr.</em> “gaberdine”) iv. 43.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dimity (<em>der.</em> from “Damietta”) ii. 210.</li>
				<li class="c029">Din (Al-); omission of, in proper names very common, iii. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dínárzád and Shahrázád (for Dunyázád and Shahrázád), iii. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dínárzádah (W.M. MS.) = “Ducat-born” (for Dínárzád) iv. 6.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Díním” (religious considerations) of the famous Andalusian Yúsuf Caro (a most fanatical work) v. 160.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dirhams— <ul><li><ul><li><ul><li><ul><li>50 = about  40 shillings 300</li></ul></li> <li>5,050 = about £220 300</li></ul></li></ul></li> <li>1,000,000 = about £25,000 161</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c029">Dish-cover used for cleanliness, and to prevent Evil-Eye falling upon food, iv. 243.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dismantled his shop (removing goods from the “but” to the “ben”), i. 207.</li>
				<li class="c029">Divan-door, dismounting at, the highest of honours, iii. 136.</li>
				<li class="c029">Divan or Darbár (levée), being also a <i><span xml:lang="fr">lit de justice</span></i> and a Court of Cassation, iii. 107.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Dive not into the depths unless thou greed for thyself and thy wants,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “tempt not Providence unless compelled so to do by necessity,” v. 422.</li>
				<li class="c029">Divorce and marriage to Mahommed of the wife of Zayd (his adopted son), ii. 197.</li>
				<li class="c029">Díwán (<em>Arab.</em>) = Council-chamber, v. 227.</li>
				<li class="c029">Díwan = Divan (the “Martabah” when placed on “Mastabah,” etc.) v. 68.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— —origin of <em>Fr.</em> “Douane” and <em>Ital.</em> “Dogana,” etc., iii. 7.</li>
				<li class="c029">Diyár Bakr, <em>lit.</em> Homes (or habitations) of Bakr (<em>pron.</em> “Diyár-i-Bekír”) iii. 269.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dodges, Eastern, to detect physiological differences between man and maid, etc., iv. 121.</li>
				<li class="c029">Doggerel, fit only for coffee-house, v. 164.</li>
				<li class="c029">Doghrí = assuredly, i. 18.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Dog or a hog” = a Jew or a Christian, ii. 147.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dogs, hatred of, inherited from Jewish ancestors, iii. 330.</li>
				<li class="c029">Drachms, Ten = 475 to 478 Eng. grains avoir., vi. 163.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Draw me aside its tail, so that I may inform thee thereanent” (also similar facetia in Mullah Jámí), v. 46.</li>
				<li class="c029">Draw thee near to them (They) = they make much of thee, i. 2.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Dream is the inspiration of the True Believer, The,” iii. 8.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dress (a Moslem should dress for public occasions), i. 159.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— exchange of, iii. 171.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dried fruits, to form the favourite “filling” for lamb and other meats prepared in “Puláo” (Pilaff) v. 358.</li>
				<li class="c029">Drinking customs, vi. 47.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— in a bright light, loved by Easterns, iv. 193.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— wine before the meal, still a custom in Syria and Egypt, vi. 192.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dromedaries the only animals used for sending messages over long distances, ii. 249.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Drowned in her blood” in the text, for “all bleeding” (hyperbole run mad), v. 139.</li>
				<li class="c029">Drunkenness (instead of “intoxication”) v. 315.</li>
				<li class="c029">Drying towels of palm fibre, iv. 55.</li>
				<li class="c029">Du’á = supplication, prayer as opposed to “Salát” = divine worship, ii. 94.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dukhán = <em>lit.</em> smoke, ii. 126.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dukhn (<em>Arab.</em>) = <em>Holcus dochna</em>, a well-known grain (<em>tr.</em> “millet”), vi. 130.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dukhúla-k = <em>lit.</em> thy entering (<em>tr.</em> “thy courtesy”) ii. 109.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dúna-k (<em>Arab.</em>) = “Well done,” iv. 239.</li>
				<li class="c029">Durà for “Zurà” or for “Zurrah,” pop. pron. “Durrah” = the <em>Holcus sativus</em>, vi. 146.</li>
				<li class="c029">Durráj (<em>tr.</em> Francolin) ii. 60.</li>
				<li class="c029">Durrat al-Ghawwás = Pearl of the diver, vi. 225.</li>
				<li class="c029">Duty of good neighbour, to keep watch and guard from evil, v. 285.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dyed robe (Abbasides, <em>black</em>; Ommiades, <em>white</em>; Fatimites, <em>green</em>) i. 160.</li>
				<li class="c005">Ear conceiving love before the eye, iv. 139.</li>
				<li class="c029">Earthquakes (curious coincidence), iii. 21.</li>
				<li class="c029">Easterns startled by sudden summons to the presence of a king, ii. 210.</li>
				<li class="c029">Eastern despots never blame their own culpable folly in misfortune, vi. 22.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Eat thy pottage,” a formula like our “Cut your mutton,” iv. 84.</li>
				<li class="c029">Eateth on the spittle, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, on an empty stomach, v. 51.</li>
				<li class="c029">Eating and drinking, iv. 160.</li>
				<li class="c029">Eaves-dropping (favourite incident of Eastern Storiology) iii. 492.</li>
				<li class="c029">Efendi (here meaning the under-governor or head clerk) iv. 214.</li>
				<li class="c029">Eglantine (or Narcissus), The lowland of, vi. 12.</li>
				<li class="c029">Egypt (magnificent city of) = Cairo, iii. 58.</li>
				<li class="c029">Elephants usually are vegetarians, iv. 265.</li>
				<li class="c029">Elias, Elijah, or Khizr, a marvellous legendary figure, vi. 100.</li>
				<li class="c029">Elopements of frequent occurrence, i. 317.</li>
				<li class="c029">Emir-Ben-Hilac-Salamis (Heron), vi. 225.</li>
				<li class="c029">Emir Yúnas (old trans. = Hamir Youmis), vi. 70.</li>
				<li class="c029">Embárah (<em>pron.</em> ’Mbárah), <em>pop. for</em> Albárihah = the last part of the preceding day or night, yesterday, v. 256.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Empty gourds” Eastern succedaneum for swimming corks, ii. 286.</li>
				<li class="c029">Enallage of persons (“third” for “first”—“youth” for “I”) v. 468.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— of persons is Koranic and therefore classical, iv. 39.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Enlarge the Turband” = to assume rank of an ’Álim or learned man, vi. 42.</li>
				<li class="c029">Entertainment of Guest, three days, vi. 26.</li>
				<li class="c029">Envious Sisters, The (various versions) iii. 491.</li>
				<li class="c029">Escarlate, a woollen cloth dyed red (probably French of the xii. century), vi. 5.</li>
				<li class="c029">Eunuchs, i. 70.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Every one cannot go to Corinth,” ii. 74.</li>
				<li class="c029">Everything returns to or resembles its origin, iv. 13.</li>
				<li class="c029">Evil Eye, iv. 60, 257.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— to keep off the = one of the functions of iron and steel, iii. 146.</li>
				<li class="c029">Exaggeration necessary to impress an Oriental audience, v. 139.</li>
				<li class="c029">Exchange of salams, a sign of safety, ii. 86.</li>
				<li class="c029">Executioner, difficulty in Marocco about finding one who becomes obnoxious to the Thár, ii. 54.</li>
				<li class="c029">Exodus of the Hebrews, Census of the (Exposition by Mr. Thayer) vi. 113.</li>
				<li class="c029">Exodus, Story of the, vi. 98.</li>
				<li class="c029">Eyes swollen by swathes, i. 30.</li>
				<li class="c005">Fa’álah (<em>Arab.</em>) = the building craft (<em>tr.</em> “industry”) iv. 179.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fadáwí (<em>Arab.</em>) = a blackguard (<em>tr.</em> “ne’er-do-well”) v. 441.</li>
				<li class="c029">Faddah (<em>Arab.</em>), <em>lit.</em> = silver; the smallest Egyptian coin, iv. 37; <ul><li>Faddahs, 2,000 = about 1s. 2d., iv. 295.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c029">—— <em>tr.</em> “groats,” v. 226.</li>
				<li class="c029">Faddán (here miswritten “Faddád”) a plough, a yoke of oxen, v. 347.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— also the common land measure of Egypt and Syria, v. 347.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Fa-ghábá thaláthat ayyamin” = and he (or it, the mountain?) disappeared for three days, v. 390.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Dr. Steingass translates), v. 390.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fahata (for “Fahasa?” or, perhaps, <em>cl. error for</em> “Fataha”) = he opened (the ground), <em>tr.</em> “choosing a place,” v. 353.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (prob. vulgarism for “Fahathá”) (fahasa) = to investigate (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 353.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— or may be read “Fataha” and <em>tr.</em> “he recited a ’Fátihah’ for them,” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), v. 353.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Fair fate befal thee, etc.,” an address only suited to a king or ruler, iv. 109.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fair play not a jewel to the Eastern mind, iii. 180.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fajj = mountain pass (Spanish, Vega = also a mountain plain) ii. 117.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fákhir (Al-) = the potter, i, 360.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fakakat = <em>lit.</em> “she flowed over like a brimful vessel.” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) <em>tr.</em> here “she expired,” iv. 333.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fakír, a title now debased in Nile Valley to an insult = “poor devil,” iii. 313.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— here the <em>Arab. syn.</em> of the <em>Pers.</em> “Darwaysh,” iii. 313.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— also come to signify a Koran chaunter, iii. 314.</li>
				<li class="c029">Falling backwards in laughter rare amongst the Badawin, ii. 202.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Falling-place of my head” = picturesque term for “birth-place,” iii. 58.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fál or omen (taking a) v. 424.</li>
				<li class="c029">Falsafah (<em>Arab.</em>) = philosophy, vi. 29.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fals (or Fils) = a fish scale, a spangle of metal, iii. 294.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Fa-min tumma,” for “thumma” (“Anon.”) vi. 91.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fanárát (<em>Arab. pl. of the Pers.</em> Fanár = a light house) here equiv. to mod. <em>Gr.</em> <span xml:lang="grc">φαυάρ</span> a lantern (<em>Egypt.</em> Fánús) <em>tr.</em> “flambeaux,” iv. 44.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fár (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>pl.</em> “Fírán” = mouse rather than rat, iv. 324.</li>
				<li class="c029">Faráfísh (<em>Arab.</em>) a word not found in dictionary—<em>tr.</em> “lumps,” iv. 12; <ul><li>nearest approach to would be Faráfík (<em>pl. of</em> Furfák) = fine, thin or soft bread, iv. 12.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c029">Faraj (Al-) ba’d al-Shiddah = (Joy after Annoy), compared to Khudadad and his brothers, iii. 269.</li>
				<li class="c029">Farajiyah = gaberdine, iii. 30.</li>
				<li class="c029">Farárijí, <em>tr.</em> “Poulterer” (in text, as if the <em>pl.</em> of “Farrúy” = chicken were “Farárij” instead of Faráríj) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 291.</li>
				<li class="c029">Faras = a mare (<em>tr.</em> “horses”) i. 216.</li>
				<li class="c029">Farásah = <em>lit.</em> Knowing a horse (<em>tr.</em> “Visnomy”) ii. 96.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fáris = a rider (<em>tr.</em> “horseman”) i. 103.</li>
				<li class="c029">Farkalah (<span xml:lang="grc">φραγέλλιο</span>) = cattle whip, ii. 47.</li>
				<li class="c029">Farkh Warak = a slip of paper, ii. 114.</li>
				<li class="c029">Farrásh = tent pitcher, body servant, iv. 157.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fárs = Persia, i. 282.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fárs (Al-) = Persians (a people famed for cleverness and debauchery) i. 2.</li>
				<li class="c029">Farsh = bed or straw-spread store-room where apples are preserved, ii. 113.</li>
				<li class="c029">Farts, savour his own (curious phenomenon) iv. 231.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Farz,” devotions, iii. 328.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fa-sáha (for “Maksah”) = and cried out, vi. 158.</li>
				<li class="c029">Faswah (<em>Arab.</em>) = “a silent break wind,” as opposed to “Zirt,” a loud fart, iv. 231.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fatáirí = a maker of “Fatírah” pancake (<em>tr.</em> “Pieman”) v. 298.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Fa-tarak-hu Muu’sí am’à dáir yaltash fí ’l-Tarík” = “hereupon Musa left his companion darkly tramping about,” v. 323.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Dr. Steingass explains and translates) v. 323.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fátihah (<em>fem.</em> of “fátih” = an opener, a conqueror), v. 460.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fátimah = a weaner, iii. 181.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— and Halímah = Martha and Mary, v. 318.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fatimé (Ja’afar’s wife, according to Heron) vi. 169.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fatír (<em>for</em> “Fatírah”) = pancake (<em>tr.</em> “scone”), v. 321.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Fa-yatrahúna,” masc. for fem. (<em>tr.</em> “miscarry”) vi. 31.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fawwák (chair of) ii. 72.</li>
				<li class="c029">Faysár, a dish peculiar to Egypt (see Baysár) iv. 176.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fazl (Al-) the elder brother of Ja’afar, ii. 71.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Caliph’s foster-brother) i. 166.</li>
				<li class="c029">Feeding captives and prisoners (exception being usually made in cases of brigands, assassins and criminals condemned for felony) v. 430.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Feeling conception” unknown except in tales, v. 124.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Feet towards Mecca,” i. 34.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fellah, natural fear of—being seen in fine gear, which would have been supposed to be stolen, iii. 171.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— women stain their veils, etc., with indigo (for sorrow) iv. 248.</li>
				<li class="c029">Feminine venereal paroxysm, iv. 144.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fidá’i (<em>Pers.</em>) = a robber, a murderer, iv. 281.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fidáwi (also “Fidá’i” and “Fidawíyah”) = pirate-men, v. 25.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fidawiyah (<em>Arab.</em>) sing. “Fidáwi” = <em>lit.</em> one who gives his life to a noble cause, iv. 281.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fighting rams, i. 210.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (the Fellah will use anything in preference to his fists in) v. 350.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fí ghuzúni zálika (<em>Arab.</em>), a peculiar phrase (<em>tr.</em> “meanwhile”) iii. 142.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fí Hayyi-kum Taflatun háma, etc. (“A maiden in your tribe avails my heart with love to fire,” etc.) (Steingass also translates) v. 149.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fí-hi = “In him” (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, either Mohammed) or “in it” (his action) i. 40.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Fí ’irzak” (<em>vulg.</em> “’arzak”), formula for “I place myself under thy protection” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 220.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fí Jífán ka’l-Jawábí (<em>Arab.</em>) meaning small things (or men) and great (<em>tr.</em> “In the wells like the tanks”) iv. 106.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fí Kíb = “in a mat” (Scott) v. 214.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fikî (the pop. form of present day for “Fakíh,” <em>prop.</em> “learned in the law”), <em>tr.</em> “tutor” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 420.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fils (or Fals) = a fish scale, a spangle of metal, iii. 294.</li>
				<li class="c029">Finján (<em>pl.</em> “Fanájíl,” <em>pron.</em> “Fanágil”), and “Filgál” used promiscuously (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 236.</li>
				<li class="c029">Finjál (<em>Arab.</em>), systematically repeated for “Finján” (<em>pron.</em> in Egypt “Fingán”) v. 236.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (<em>vulg.</em> for “Finján”) = coffee cup, iv. 198.</li>
				<li class="c029">Firásah (<em>Arab.</em>) = penetration, iv. 10.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— <em>lit.</em> = judging the points of a mare (<em>tr.</em> “physiognomy”) i. 286.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fir’aun (<em>Arab.</em>), the dynastic name of Egyptian Kings = Pharaoh (Holy Writ) vi. 12.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fire lighted to defend mother and babe from bad spirits, i. 279.</li>
				<li class="c029">Firozábádí (author of “Kámús”), Tale of, iii. 84.</li>
				<li class="c029">First day = our Sunday, i. 286.</li>
				<li class="c029">“First Footsteps” quoted, vi. 65.</li>
				<li class="c029">First night (wedding night) v. 223.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fírúz (<em>Pers.</em> “Píroz”) = Victorious, triumphant, i. 185.</li>
				<li class="c029">Firúzah (<em>Arab.</em>) = turquoise, (<em>Pers. form</em>) Pírozah, iii. 270.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fityán (<em>pl.</em> of Fatà) = my fine fellows, ii. 42.</li>
				<li class="c029">Flfl’a (a scribal error?), may be Filfil = pepper or palm fibre, v. 351.</li>
				<li class="c029">Flogging as punishment, vi. 9.</li>
				<li class="c029">Flower = the breast, ii. 252.</li>
				<li class="c029">Flying Carpet (prototype of) iii. 42.</li>
				<li class="c029">Food, calls for, at critical times not yet wholly obsolete amongst the civilised of the nineteenth century, iii. 113.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— respect due to (Tale of “Daftardar”) v. 86.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Folk are equal, but in different degrees” (compared with “All men are created equal”) v. 425.</li>
				<li class="c029">Force of fancy, iii. 182.</li>
				<li class="c029">Forehead (compared with a page of paper upon which Destiny writes her decrees) i. 100.</li>
				<li class="c029">Formula of the cup and lute, v. 196.</li>
				<li class="c029">Forwardness on the part of women held to be insulting by modest Moslem, iv. 68.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fowl (domestic) unknown to Europe till about the time of Pericles (<em>ob.</em> <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr> 429) iv. 32.</li>
				<li class="c029">Freemasonry, iv. 288.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Full dressed and ornamented” (a girl lying beneath a slab), a sign of foul play, v. 317.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fumigating gugglets (with musk) ii. 275.</li>
				<li class="c029">Funeral, Customs at, iii. 380.</li>
				<li class="c029">Furát River (Euphrates) vi. 122.</li>
				<li class="c029">Futúh (Al-) <em>lit.</em> = the victories (<em>tr.</em> “the honorarium”) i. 285.</li>
				<li class="c005">Gáikwár, iii. 134.</li>
				<li class="c029">Galland quoted, iii. 3, 12, 18, 19, 20, 22, 51, 58, 71, 77, 82, 87, 91, 108, 110, 116, 140, 158, 160, 167, 171, 297, 303, 321, 327, 331, 334, 335, 341, 348, 351, 353, 355, 363, 369, 377, 380, 385, 416, 422, 429, 446, 472, 500, 506; <ul><li>iv. 41, 244, 348.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c029">Gandharba-lagana (fairy wedding) of the Hindus, iii. 448.</li>
				<li class="c029">Gandharbas = heavenly choristers, iii. 448.</li>
				<li class="c029">Gardener, Egyptian names for (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 293.</li>
				<li class="c029">Gardens of the Hesperides and of King Isope, (Chaucer) iii. 74.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Gásha” = he produced a sound, iv. 20.</li>
				<li class="c029">Gauttier quoted, iv. 3, 19, 49, 74, 90, 95, 97, 176, 189, 228, 244, 254, 334.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— quoted, v. 3, 17, 21, 63, 123, 125, 231, 263.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— quoted, vi. 3, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, <i><span xml:lang="la">ib.</span></i>, 15, <i><span xml:lang="la">ib.</span></i>, 33, 34, 41, 59, 68, 89, 167, 225, <i><span xml:lang="la">ib.</span></i>, 226, 234.</li>
				<li class="c029">Gave her the hire of her going forth (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> Engaged her for a revel and paid her in advance) 44.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghába = departed (may here mean “passed away”) v. 390.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Ghabasah” (<em>Arab.</em>) from Ghabas = obscure, dust-colored (<em>tr.</em> “clouded of color”) iv. 22.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghalílí = my yearning (<em>tr.</em> “my thirst”) ii. 102.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Ghánim bin Ayyúb = The Thrall o’ Love”—position of in Arab. texts compared with Galland, iii. 303.</li>
				<li class="c029">Gharbíyah (province in Egypt) ii. 16.</li>
				<li class="c029">Gharím = debtor or creditor, vi. 77.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghashamsham Al- = the Stubborn, the Obstinate, vi. 256.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghashím (<em>Arab.</em>), from the root “Ghashm” (iniquity) = a “Johnny Raw”—a “raw laddie,” iii. 91.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (<em>Arab.</em>) = a favourite word of insult in Egypt, v. 29.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghát (<em>pop.</em> “Ghaut”) = the steps (or path) which lead to a watering place, iii. 491.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghattí = “Cover it up,” ii. 158.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghaur (or lowland) = the fall of the waist, ii. 252.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghuráb al-bayn = Raven of the wold or of parting, ii. 126.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghaush = a tree of hard wood whereof musical instruments are made, iv. 20.</li>
				<li class="c029">“——” for “Ghaushah” = noise, row, vi. 69.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghaushah = tumult, quarrel, iv. 20; <ul><li>(<em>tr.</em> “clamour”) a Persianism for which “Ghaughá” is a more common form, iv. 20.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c029">Ghawwasha = he produced a sound, iv. 20.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghawwásún = divers (<em>tr.</em> “duckers”) i. 68.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghaylah Al- = Siesta-time (Badawi speech), v. 151.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghayr an (<em>Arab.</em>) = otherwise that, except that (<em>tr.</em> “Still”) iii. 82.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghayr Wá’d or “Min ghayr Wa’d” = <em>lit.</em> without previous agreement (<em>tr.</em> “undesignedly”) iv. 149.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghayth al-hátil = incessant rain of small drops, vi. 241.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghazbán = an angry man, i. 265.</li>
				<li class="c029">Gháziyah (<em>Arab.</em>) = a gypsy (<em>pl.</em> Ghawázi) iv. 29.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghazn = a crease—a wrinkle, iii. 142.</li>
				<li class="c029">Gheir (<em>Syriac</em>) = for (<em>der.</em> from Greek <span xml:lang="grc">γὰρ</span>) iii. 82.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghetto, the Jewish quarter (Hárah) which Israelites call “Hazer” = a court yard, an inclosure, v. 217.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Ghibtu ’an al-Dunyá” a pop. phrase, <em>tr.</em> “I was estranged from the world,” meaning simply “I fainted,” v. 97.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghilmán (in text “Wuldán”), the boys of Paradise, vi. 128.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghiovendé (<em>Turk.</em>), a race of singers and dancers, professional Nautch-girls, iv. 72.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghirárah (<em>Arab.</em>) (<em>pl.</em> “Gharáír”) = a sack, v. 228.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghiyár (<em>Arab.</em>) = any piece of dress or uniform which distinguishes a class, vi. 52.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— in Pers. = a strip of yellow cloth worn by Jews subject to the Shah, vi. 52.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Ghul-who-eateth-man-we-pray-Allah-for safety” (compound name), v. 161.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghubár = dust (joined to ’Afár = “sanddevils”) iv. 262.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghúlah = an ogress (<em>fem.</em> of Ghúl), iii. 327.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Ghurrát” (<em>Arab.</em>) may be bright looks, charms in general, or “fore-locks” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 88.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghusl, or complete ablution, v. 93.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— ablution, i. 20.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— or complete ablution after car. cop., i. 220.</li>
				<li class="c029">Giallo antico, verd’ antico = serpentine limestone, iii. 139.</li>
				<li class="c029">Giant Face (a parallel to the “Bodiless Head”) ii. 102.</li>
				<li class="c029">Gil-i-sar-shúí (<em>Pers.</em>) = head washing clay (<em>tr.</em> “fuller’s earth”) iii. 348.</li>
				<li class="c029">Girbahs = water-skins, v. 28.</li>
				<li class="c029">Glass tokens (for coins) iii. 351.</li>
				<li class="c029">Goat’s droppings (used as fuel, also for practical jokes) i. 288.</li>
				<li class="c029">Golden Calf of Al-Sámiri, vi. 160.</li>
				<li class="c029">Goodwife of Cairo and her four gallants (analogous) v. 253.</li>
				<li class="c029">Gouged out the right eye, v. 322.</li>
				<li class="c029">Guernsey and Sark folk-lore, v. 328.</li>
				<li class="c029">Guest-fires, ii. 249.</li>
				<li class="c029">Guest rite = three days, vi. 26.</li>
				<li class="c029">Guide going in front, i. 201.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (in Africa), following, instead of leading the party, v. 388.</li>
				<li class="c005">“H” (the final aspirate), use of, v. 419.</li>
				<li class="c029">Há! Há! so Háka (<em>fem.</em> Háki), <em>Arab.</em> = Here for thee (<em>tr.</em> “There! there!”) iii. 89.</li>
				<li class="c029">Habashí = an Abyssinian, iii. 276.</li>
				<li class="c029">Habbah (<em>Arab.</em>) = a grain (of barley), an obolus, a mite, vi. 53.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Al- = grain (for al-Jinnah) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 108.</li>
				<li class="c029">Habib, Note on History of, vi. 262.</li>
				<li class="c029">“——, Prince, and Dorathil-goase” (<em>Eng. trans.</em>) vi. 225.</li>
				<li class="c029">Habíb = the Beloved, vi. 226.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Hábíl” and “Kábíl” (<em>Arab.</em>) equiv. of Abel and Cain, v. 56.</li>
				<li class="c029">Habshí (chief) of Jinjírah (=Al-Jazirah, the Island), admiral of the Grand Moghul’s fleets, iii. 276.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hadas = moved (“event,” a word not easy to translate) i. 321.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Hadda ’lláho bayní wa baynakum,” <em>tr.</em> “Allah draw the line between me and you,” v. 406.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hádi (Al-) Fourth Abbaside (<span class="fss"><abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr></span> 785–786) i. 165.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hæmorrhage stopped by plunging the stump into burning oil, ii. 168.</li>
				<li class="c029">Háfiz = traditionist and Koran reader, iii. 341.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hajárata ’l-Bahramán (<em>Arab.</em>) carbuncles, v. 133.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hájib = Chamberlain, i. 324.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = eyebrow or chamberlain, ii. 252.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hajj (Al-) = the company of pilgrims (<em>tr.</em> “pilgrimage caravan”) i. 196.</li>
				<li class="c029">“——” never applied to the Visitation (Ziyárah) at Al-Medinah, i. 196.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hajj al-Shárif = Holy pilgrimage, i. 194.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hajjáj (Al-), i. 47.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— son of Yúsuf the Thakafí, v.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hajjat al-Islam, the Pilgrimage commanded to all Moslems, i. 194.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Há Káhi Ptáh” (<em>O. Egypt.</em>) = “the Land of the great God, Ptah,” vi. 12.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hálah mutawassitah (<em>Arab.</em>) = middle-class folk, iii. 94.</li>
				<li class="c029">Haláwat = <em>lit.</em> a sweetmeat (ii. 127), a gratuity, a thank-offering (<em>tr.</em> “a douceur”) i. 35.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Miftáh = Sweetmeat of the Key-money (<em>tr.</em> “<i><span xml:lang="fr">douceur</span></i> of the Key”) ii. 20.</li>
				<li class="c029">Halbún, The Boobies of (tale concerning them), v. 273.</li>
				<li class="c029">Halfah grass, ii. 46.</li>
				<li class="c029">Half-man, an old Plinian fable (<em>Pers.</em> Ním-Chihreh, and <em>Arab.</em> Shikk) iv. 76.</li>
				<li class="c029">Half of marriage-settlement due to wife on divorcement, i. 311.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hálik (<em>Arab.</em>) = intensely black, iv. 24.</li>
				<li class="c029">Halkah = throat, throttle, iv. 190.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Halwá” = sweetmeat, iv. 7.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hamadán, a well-known city of Irák ’Ajamí, i. 203.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hamákah = fury, v. 446.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hamám = ruffed pigeon, culver, v. 151.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hamd (Al-) = Allah-lauds, ii. 221.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hamhama = muttered, i. 265.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hamídah = the Praiseworthy (according to Totárám Shayyán, instead of Fátimah = a weaner) iii. 181.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hammám, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, the private bagnio, i. 262.</li>
				<li class="c029">——, necessary to enter after car. cop., vi. 171.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— bin Ghálib al-Farazdak, a famous Christian Poet, i. 42.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hammama-hu (<em>Arab.</em>) = bathed, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, scraping, kneading, soaping, etc., iii. 133.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hámiz = pop. term for pickles (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “Sour meat” as opposed to “sweetmeats”) iv. 7.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hamlat al-jamal = according to Scott, a “Camel’s load of Treasure,” iv. 59.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hamzah, uncle of Mahommed, ii. 164.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hand (She raised her) heavenwards (not “her hands” after Christian fashion), v. 174.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Handicraft an it enrich not, still it veileth,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, enables a man to conceal the pressure of impecuniosity, v. 223.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Hanná-kumú’llah” = Almighty Allah make it pleasant to you, v. 69.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hanút (<em>Arab.</em>) = aromatic herbs, iv. 257.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = perfumes (leaves of the lotus tree) i. 290.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— means either “Vintner” or “Vintner’s shop,” vi. 124.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Haply there will befal thee somewhat contrary to this”—a euphuism meaning some disaster, v. 237.</li>
				<li class="c029">Haráis (pl. of Harísah) = meat puddings, i. 287.</li>
				<li class="c029">Haráj (in <em>Egypt.</em> “Harág”) = the cry with which the Dallál (broker) announces each sum bidden at an auction, iv. 37.</li>
				<li class="c029">Harám = “forbidden,” sinful (<em>tr.</em> “useless”) i. 72.</li>
				<li class="c029">Harárah = heat (<em>here der.</em> from “Hurr,” freeborn) noble, and <em>tr.</em> “nobility,” v. 289.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hárát (or quarters) closed at night with strong wooden doors, ii. 9.</li>
				<li class="c029">Harem, v. 283.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— supposed to be in Eastern Wing of Palace, i. 199.</li>
				<li class="c029">Harfúsh = Larrikin, popularly a “blackguard,” i. 4.</li>
				<li class="c029">Harím (women) = the broken pl. of “Hurmah,” from “Haram,” the honour of the house (also an infinitive whose pl. is Harímát = the women of a family) v. 283.</li>
				<li class="c029">Harísah = meat puddings, ii. 277.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = meat pudding, vi. 159.</li>
				<li class="c029">Harj, gen. joined with Marj (Harj wa Marj) = utter confusion, chaos (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 342.</li>
				<li class="c029">Harj wa Laght (<em>Arab.</em>) = turmoil and trouble (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 342.</li>
				<li class="c029">Harrán, King of, iii. 269.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (the Hebrew Charran) iii. 269.</li>
				<li class="c029">Harun al-Rashid (house still standing) i. 15.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— and his famous pilgrimage from Baghdad to Mecca, iii. 177.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hasá Al = the Plain of Pebbles, vi. 169.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hasab wa nasab = degree and descent, v. 43.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hasal (for which read Khasal) <em>tr.</em> “gain,” v. 425.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hasan, the Handsome (in the old trans. “The Hazen”) (Kházin = treasurer?) vi. 68.</li>
				<li class="c029">Háshim = breaker, i. 47.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Háshimí,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, a descendant of Al-Háshim, great grandfather of the Prophet, vi. 191.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hashimites (and Abbasides) fine specimens of the Moslem Pharisee, i. 159.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hashísh = Bhang in general, iv. 19; confection of, iv. 195.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hasír = mat (used for sleeping on during the hot season), i. 204.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hásil (Al-) (<em>Arab.</em>) = government stores, also the taxes, the revenue, vi. 60.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hátíf = an ally, ii. 234.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hátif, or invisible speaker, iii. 519.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hatím (wall) = The “broken” (wall) to the north of Ka’abah, v. 180.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hátim of the Tayy-tribe, proverbial for liberality, vi. 167.</li>
				<li class="c029">Haudaj (<em>Arab.</em>) = a camel-litter, <em>tr.</em> “Howdah,” v. 193.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = camel-litter, vi. 181.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Haukalah” and “Haulakah,” i. 265.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hauráni = (native of Hauran), Job’s country, ii. 50.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hawálín, cler. error for either “hawálà” = all around, or “Hawálí” = surroundings (<span class="sc">St.</span>), v. 301.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Hawánít” <em>pl.</em> of “Hanút” = the shop or vault of a Vintner (<em>tr.</em> “taverns”) vi. 124.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hawar, many meanings of, vi. 73.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hawwúlín (<em>Arab.</em>), <em>tr.</em> “over his ears,” (a corrupt passage in text) v. 301.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hayfá Al-, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “The Slim-waisted,” v. 125.</li>
				<li class="c029">Háyishah from ✓ “Haysh” = spoiling, iv. 190.</li>
				<li class="c029">Haykal (<em>Ar.</em> and <em>Heb.</em>) = a large space, a temple (<em>tr.</em> “hallowed fane”) ii. 175.</li>
				<li class="c029">Haysumah (<em>Arab.</em>) = smooth stones (<em>tr.</em> “pebbles”) iv. 347.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hayy = either serpent, or living, alive (<em>tr.</em> “living branch”) vi. 99.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hazár = the nightingale, or bird of a thousand songs, v. 151.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hazer = a courtyard, an inclosure, v. 217.</li>
				<li class="c029">Házir (<em>Arab.</em>) corresponds with English “Yes, sir!” (<em>tr.</em> “Present”), iv. 254.</li>
				<li class="c029">Házúr (Al-) = loquacity, frivolous garrulity (<em>tr.</em> “jargon”) i. 283.</li>
				<li class="c029">“He who keeps his hands crossed upon his breast, shall not see them cut off,” i. 114.</li>
				<li class="c029">He is of the lords of houses = folk of good family, ii. 169.</li>
				<li class="c029">“He Pilgrimaged: quoth one, Yes, and for his villainy lives (yujáwir) at Meccah.”—<em>Egyptian Proverb</em>, i. 196.</li>
				<li class="c029">He for she, iv. 29.</li>
				<li class="c029">“He found the beasts and their loads and the learned men,” etc., a new form of “bos atque sacerdos,” iv. 311.</li>
				<li class="c029">“He found her a treasure wherefrom the talisman had been loosed,” v. 14.</li>
				<li class="c029">“He ... who administereth between a man and his heart,” a Koranic phrase (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 42.</li>
				<li class="c029">“He readeth it off (readily) as one drinketh water,” vi. 5.</li>
				<li class="c029">He sat upon ashes (may be figurative or literal) vi. 19.</li>
				<li class="c029">“He mounted his father and clothed himself with his mother” = he sold his father for a horse and his mother for a fine dress, vi. 105.</li>
				<li class="c029">Head cut off and set upon the middle of the corpse (in case of a Jew), or under the armpit (in case of a Moslem), iv. 64.</li>
				<li class="c029">Head placed at a distance from the body (by way of insult) vi. 15.</li>
				<li class="c029">Headsman paces round convict three times preparatory to execution; a custom at the Courts of Caliphs generally, vi. 52.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Health to you and healing,” usual formulæ when a respectable person is seen drinking, vi. 47.</li>
				<li class="c029">Heaven, the fifth = the planet Mars, v. 119.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hebrews and their Exodus (Exposition by Mr. Thayer) vi. 113.</li>
				<li class="c029">Helios (Apollo), Worship of, not extinct in mod. Greece, vi. 100.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Hell-flame but not shame,” <em>proverb</em>, ii. 148.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Help ye a Moslemah” (in text “Help ye the Moslems”) v. 368.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hemp, Indian, iv. 195.</li>
				<li class="c029">Her desire was quenched, iv. 144.</li>
				<li class="c029">Herklots quoted, v. 28.</li>
				<li class="c029">Heron quoted, v. 27; <ul><li>vi. 41, 50, 52, 68, 72, 167, 168, 169, 170, 173, 178, 225, 234, 242, 245, 247.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c029">Hibá = dust, ii. 244.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hibernicè, “kilt” for beaten, i. 247.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Hicar was a native of the country of Haram (Harrán), and had brought from thence the knowledge of the true God,” vi. 4.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hidden (for fear of the “Eye”) i. 75.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hidyah (<em>Arab.</em>) in Egypt = a falcon (<em>tr.</em> “a Kite”) iv. 101.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Hie Salvationwards” (the Words of Azán) i. 42.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hifán (<em>pl.</em> of “Hafnah”) = handful, mouthful (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 11.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hijáz (Al-) = The Moslem’s Holy Land, (Cap. Meccah) ii. 193.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hikáyah (=literal production of a discourse, etc.) iv. 39.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hilál = the crescent (waxing or waning) for the first and last two or three nights, v. 72.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hilm (vision), “au ’Ilm” (knowledge) <em>Arab.</em> (<em>tr.</em> dreaming or awake) a phrase peculiar to this MSS., iv. 39.</li>
				<li class="c029">Himà = the tribal domain (<em>tr.</em> “tribe-land”) ii. 215.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = the private and guarded lands of a Badawi tribe (<em>tr.</em> “demesne”) v. 142.</li>
				<li class="c029">Himyán (or Hamyán) = a girdle (<em>tr.</em> “purse belt”) i. 152.</li>
				<li class="c029">Himyarite (in text “Akyál,” <em>pl.</em> of “Kayl” = “Kings of the Himyarite peoples”) here = the heroes, vi. 232.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hindostani Version quoted, iii. 3, 4, 6, 8, 11, 12, 19, 26, 27, 33, 51, 57, 61, 75, 79, 82, 85, 87, 95, 96, 97, 105, 113, 114, 116, 125, 129, 133, 137, 140, 144, 147, 148, 150, 158, 159, 160, 161, 166, 167, 170, 171, 174, 175, 180, 185, 188, 189, 294, 297, 355, 377, 380, 422, 446.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hirfah = a trade, a guild, a corporation (<em>here</em> the officers of police) ii. 54.</li>
				<li class="c029">His head forewent his feet = He fell down senseless, i. 17.</li>
				<li class="c029">“His eyes turned in his head” (to show the whites, as happens to the mesmerised) ii. 242.</li>
				<li class="c029">“His bones were crushed upon his flesh” for “His flesh ... bones,” iv. 347.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hisában tawíl = a long punishment, vi. 157.</li>
				<li class="c029">“History of Chec Chahabeddin” (Shaykh Shiháb al-Dín) in “Turkish Tales” of Petis de la Croix = here, “The Tale of the Warlock and the Young Cook of Baghdad,” vi. 121.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Hizà (<span xml:lang="ar">حظى</span>, in MS. <span xml:lang="ar">حفى</span>) bi-Zaijati-há” = <i><span xml:lang="fr">le bonheur de ses aventures</span></i>, vi. 260.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hizám = girdle, sash, waist-belt, <em>tr.</em> “waist-shawl,” iii. 20.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hms = Vetchling, vi. 74.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Ho! Aloes good for use. Ho! Pepper,” etc., cries of an itinerant pedlar hawking about women’s wares, v. 351.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ho, Tuffáhah! Ho, Ráhat al-Kulúb = O Apple, O Repose o’ Hearts, &amp;c., i. 17.</li>
				<li class="c029">Holy House (youth being of, can deny that he belongs to any place or race), v. 39.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hobal, the biggest idol in the Meccan Pantheon, vi. 26.</li>
				<li class="c029">Horseman of the horsemen, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, not a well-known or distinguished horseman, but a chance rider, vi. 92.</li>
				<li class="c029">Horse-thief chained to four pickets of iron, ii. 224.</li>
				<li class="c029">Horses used in India, iii. 297.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hospitality (House of) v. 330.</li>
				<li class="c029">Houdas (Professor) quoted, v. 47, 48; vi. 7, 36, 48, 57, 62, 66, 67, 72, 84, 104, 125, 126, 147, 178, 187, 188, 189, 191, 243, 247, 251, 257.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hour (would his hour had never come) i. 27.</li>
				<li class="c029">Houri, vi. 73.</li>
				<li class="c029">House of the Elephant = the Castle’s squares at chess, ii. 205.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— of Háshim, great grandfather to the prophet, v. 46.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— masters (also Kings) in the East are the last to be told a truth familiar to all but themselves and their wives, iv. 351.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— made of cob or unbaked brick, which readily melts in rain, iv. 214.</li>
				<li class="c029">Housewife, Egyptian or Syrian, will make twenty dishes out of roast lamb, iv. 174.</li>
				<li class="c029">“How very good he was to me,” i. 32.</li>
				<li class="c029">“How was it thou honouredst us, and what was the cause of thy coming, etc.” the address of well-bred man to a stranger, vi. 170.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hubban li-raasi-k (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>lit.</em> = out of love for thy head, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, from affection for thee, iv. 50.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hudá Sirru-hu, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, his secret sin was guided (by Allah) to the safety of concealment, <em>tr.</em> “his secret was safe directed,” v. 339.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Dr. Steingass reads “Wahadá Sirru-hu” = “and his mind was at rest”), v. 339.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hudhud (<em>tr.</em> “hoopoe”) called from its cry (“Hood! Hood!”) i. 148.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hujjat = a legal deed (may also mean “an excuse”) ii. 27.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hummus (or Himmis) = vetches, iv. 7.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hundred dirhams = £4 (about), i. 43.</li>
				<li class="c029">Húr (Al-Ayn) feminine counterparts of the “Boys of Paradise” (Ghilmán) vi. 128.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Ayn = our vulgar “Houri,” vi. 73.</li>
				<li class="c029">Húrí (<em>Arab.</em>) for Húr = pool, marsh or quagmire (vulg. “bogshop”) iv. 206.</li>
				<li class="c029">Husn tadbir = <em>lit.</em> “beauty of his contrivance” (<em>tr.</em> “Seemliness of his stratagem”) ii. 29.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Huwa inná lam na’rifu-h” (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>lit.</em> = He, verily we wot him not (suggesting “I am he”) iv. 133.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hysterics, common amongst the races of the East, i. 198.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hydrophobia in Egypt, iii. 330.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hypocrites = those who feign to be Moslems when they are miscreants, iii. 83.</li>
				<li class="c005">“I am an Irání but Walláhi indeed I am not lying” (Persian saying for “I will shun leasing”), v. 303.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— as one who hath fallen from the heavens to the earth,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, an orphan and had seen better days, iv. 75.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— between his hands = at his service, i. 280.</li>
				<li class="c029">“I bade her be the owner of herself,” one of the formulas of divorce, vi. 178.</li>
				<li class="c029">I cannot fill my eye with the twain = I cannot look at them long, ii. 88.</li>
				<li class="c029">“I change the pasture” = I pass from grave to gay, etc., iv. 7.</li>
				<li class="c029">“I commit him to thy charge under God,” ii. 184.</li>
				<li class="c029">“I have accepted,” the normal idiom “I accept,” vi. 81.</li>
				<li class="c029">“I have not any eye that can look at him” = “I cannot bear to see him,” ii. 110.</li>
				<li class="c029">I have not found thy heel propitious to me, i. 21.</li>
				<li class="c029">“I must present myself before him (the King) with face unveiled,” a Persian custom for women, iii. 533.</li>
				<li class="c029">I smell the scent of the Jinn, ii. 125.</li>
				<li class="c029">“I think not otherwise” = “I am quite sure,” ii. 119.</li>
				<li class="c029">“I will hire thee a shop in the Chauk” = Carfax or market street, iii. 61.</li>
				<li class="c029">I will lay down my life to save thee from sorrow—a commonplace hyperbole of love, ii. 181.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ibl, specific name for camels (<em>tr.</em> “certain camels”) i. 315.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ibn al Sammák = Son of the fisherman or fishmonger, i. 171.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— mín, a vulgarism for “man,” iii. 53.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ibráa = deliverance from captivity, v. 203.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ibrahim al-Harráni (<em>Arab.</em> title for Abraham) iii. 270.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— of Mosul, the far famed musician, v. 193.</li>
				<li class="c029">“’Iddah” = days during which a widow cannot marry (<em>tr.</em> “widowhood”) iii. 379.</li>
				<li class="c029">“If Almighty Allah have appointed unto thee aught thou shalt obtain it without toil and travail”—a favourable sentiment, iii. 10.</li>
				<li class="c029">“If his friend the Devil be overstrong for thee, flee him rather than be slain,” ii. 202.</li>
				<li class="c029">If my hand were changed = if my hand had lost its cunning, ii. 78.</li>
				<li class="c029">“’Ifr” (<em>fem.</em> ’Ifrah) = a wicked and dangerous man, iii. 80.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ifrít, mostly derived from “’afar” = dust, iii. 80.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ihtidá = divine direction, i. 313.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ihtimám wa Ghullah (former should be written with major aspirate meaning “fever”) <em>tr.</em> “there befel him much concern,” v. 421.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ihtirák = burning (used in the metaphorical sense of consuming, torturing) i. 35.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ihramat li al-Salát = she pronounced the formula of Intention (Niyat) (<em>tr.</em> “the Prohibition”), ii. 94.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Ij’alní fí Kll,” (the latter word a cler. error for “Kal-a” or “Kiláa” = safety, protection) = Set me in a place of safety, vi. 84.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Ikhbár” (=mere account of the discourse, <i><span xml:lang="la">oratio indirecta</span></i>, etc.) iv. 39.</li>
				<li class="c029">Iklím = climes, ii. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Ilà an káta-ka ’l-’amal al-rabíh” (In MS. giving no sense. Translations by Author and Dr. Steingass) v. 58.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Iláj (Al-) = insertion (<em>tr.</em> “horizontal refreshment”) ii. 185.</li>
				<li class="c029">Illicit intercourse, (method intended to procure) vi. 126.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Ilm al-Ghayb (<em>Arab.</em>) = the Science of Hidden Things, iii. 452.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Híah, <em>gen. tr.</em> “Astrology”—here meaning Scientific Physiognomy, iii. 32.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Hurúf (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>tr.</em> “Notaricon,” iv. 80.</li>
				<li class="c029">Imr al-Kays (in text “Imryu ’l-Kays”) a pre-Islamitic poet (“The man of al-Kays”) v. 181.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Ilm al-Mukáshafah = the Science by which Eastern adepts discover man’s secret thoughts (<em>tr.</em> “Thought reading”) iii. 539.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ilm al-Raml = (Science of the Sand), our geomancy, iii. 156.</li>
				<li class="c029">Imam = Antistes or fugleman at prayer who leads off the orisons, ii. 101.</li>
				<li class="c029">Imám = a leader of prayer, iii. 380.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = an antistes—a leader in prayer (a word with a host of meanings) iii. 27.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (the spiritual title of the Caliph) i. 43.</li>
				<li class="c029">Imán = prayer, iii. 380.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Imárah = a building, <em>tr. here</em> souterrain (probably clerical error for Maghárah = a cave, a souterrain) iii. 15.</li>
				<li class="c029">Impotence, causes and cure of, iv. 257.</li>
				<li class="c029">Improbable details on which stories depend, iii. 160.</li>
				<li class="c029">In a modest way (<em>lit.</em> In the way of moderation) i. 248.</li>
				<li class="c029">Inbasata ’l-Layl al-Asá = “when the night of offence was dispread,” vi. 243.</li>
				<li class="c029">Indecencies of Bhang-eaters, iv. 196.</li>
				<li class="c029">Indian hemp, iv. 195.</li>
				<li class="c029">“’Ind ’uzzáti ’s-siníni” (<em>Arab.</em>) = <em>lit.</em> the thorny shrubs of ground bare of pasture, v. 59.</li>
				<li class="c029">Infanticide (in accordance with the manners of the age) iii. 497.</li>
				<li class="c029">“In lam tazidd Kayní” = <em>lit.</em> unless thou oppose my forming or composing (<em>tr.</em> “unless thou avert my shame”) iv. 11.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Inna házih Hurmah; lam ’alay-há Shatárah” = “Truly this one is a woman; I must not act vilely or rashly towards her” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 220.</li>
				<li class="c029">Inscriptions on metal trays sold to Europeans—(also on tablecloths) ii. 87.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Insistance overcometh hindrance” (equiv. of “’Tis dogged as does it” of Charles Darwin) v. 171.</li>
				<li class="c029">Intersexual powers, vaunting, v. 91.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Intihába ’l furas” <em>lit.</em> = the snatching of opportunities (<em>tr.</em> “divest himself in a pleasurable case”) v. 222.</li>
				<li class="c029">Intoxication (properly meaning “poisoning”) a term to be left for “teetotallers” to use, v. 315.</li>
				<li class="c029">Inverted speech, form of, v. 60.</li>
				<li class="c029">Irak Al-, the head-quarters of the Khárijite heresy, v. 213.</li>
				<li class="c029">Iraks (two) = Irák Arabí (Chaldæe) and ’Ajami (Western Persia) ii. 191.</li>
				<li class="c029">Irán (father of the Furs) = Persians, etc son of “Ashur,” vi. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">Irham turham = Pity and shalt be pitied (one of the few passive verbs still used in pop. par.) v. 169.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Irk = vein (of our eye) <em>equiv. to</em> “the apple of the eye,” ii. 144.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Háshimí = the Háshimí vein, i. 29.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— al-Usná” (<em>Arab.</em>) = chordæ testiculorum (<em>tr.</em> “testicle-veins”) v. 52.</li>
				<li class="c029">Irregular use of inn, perpetuated in some monster hotels throughout Europe, ii. 20.</li>
				<li class="c029">Irtiyád = a place where the urine spray may not defile the dress (<em>tr.</em> “a place to make water”) ii. 13.</li>
				<li class="c029">“’Irz” (=protection), “Hurmah” and “Shatárah” (words explaining each other mutually) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 220.</li>
				<li class="c029">Isá, according to Moslems, was not begotten in the normal way, vi. 100.</li>
				<li class="c029">Isaac of Mosul, the Greatest of Arab Musicians, ii. 70.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Ishá” prayer, iv. 296.</li>
				<li class="c029">Is’hák = Isaac (Abraham and Isaac) vi. 104.</li>
				<li class="c029">Is’háku kána ’l-Zabíh = Isaac was the victim, vi. 104.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ishári, a word which may have many meanings (<em>tr.</em> “a white cock in his tenth month”) iv. 341.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ishmael (not Isaac) made the hero by mod. Moslems of the story “Abraham and Isaac,” vi. 104.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ishtalaka = he surmised, discovered (a secret), v. 33.</li>
				<li class="c029">Islam Al- is based upon the fundamental idea of a Republic, vi. 194.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Shaykh of), v. 317.</li>
				<li class="c029">Israel, history of the name, vi. 100.</li>
				<li class="c029">Israelite, now polite synonym for Jew, vi. 100.</li>
				<li class="c029">Isráfíl = Raphael, v. 302.</li>
				<li class="c029">Istanáda ’ala Shakkati-h, <em>tr.</em> “(he might) lean against his quarter,” v. 401.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— “he lay down on his rug” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 401.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Istanatú lá-ha” (presupposing “istanattú” 10th form of “natt” = he jumped) <em>tr.</em> “they threw themselves on her neck” (Dr. Steingass takes it for 8th form of “sanat” and translates “listened attentively”) v. 34.</li>
				<li class="c029">Istífá = choice, selection, v. 203.</li>
				<li class="c029">Istikhráj Al- = making “elegant extracts,” v. 126.</li>
				<li class="c029">Istiláh (<em>Arab.</em>) = Specific dialect, idiom (<em>tr.</em> “right direction”) iv. 104.</li>
				<li class="c029">Istinshák (<em>Arab.</em>) one of the items of the Wuzú or lesser ablution (<em>tr.</em> “water”) iv. 58.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Itawwaha,” <em>tr.</em> “throwing his right leg over his back,” v. 382.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Dr. Steingass also explains and translates) v. 382.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ittikà (viiith of ✓ wakà); the form Takwà gen. used = fearing God, vi. 96.</li>
				<li class="c029">Iyálah = government-general, iv. 245.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Iyál-hu = <em>lit.</em> his family (<em>tr.</em> wives) ii. 8.</li>
				<li class="c029">Iyás al-Muzani, al Kazi (of Bassorah) the Model Physiognomist, iv. 107.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Iz lam naakhaz, wa-illá,” etc., a fair specimen of Arab. ellipsis, iv. 300.</li>
				<li class="c005">Ja’ad = a curl, a liberal man, iv. 14.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ja’ad al-yad = miserly, iv. 14.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ja’afar, the model Moslem minister, v. 72.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jabábirah—fabled Giant rulers of Syria, iii. 86.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jabal (Al-) al-Mukawwar = the Crescent Mountain (from Kaur = a park) ii. 119.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jabal al-Saháb = “The mount of clouds,” v. 376.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jabal Ka’ka’án, the highest parts of Meccah, inhabited by the Jurham tribe (so called from their clashing armour and arms) vi. 131.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jabhat = the lintel, opposed to the threshold (<em>tr. here</em> “forehead” of his shop) ii. 137.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jabr (Al-) = the tyranny (equiv. of “Civil law”) i. 212.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jady (<em>Arab.</em>) = the zodiacal sign Capricorn (<em>tr.</em> “kid”) v. 46.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jafr, supposed to mean a skin (camel’s or dog’s) prepared as parchment for writing, vi. 168.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jafr Al-, a cabalistic book, prognosticating all that will ever happen to Moslems, vi. 168.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Al-, confused with “Ja’afar bin Tayyár” the Jinni, vi. 168.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jaftáwát (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>pl.</em> of <em>Turk.</em> “Chifút” = a Jew, or mean fellow, vi. 67.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jahím-hell, v. 55, 201.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jahl = ignorance (also wickedness) i. 271.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jahrbaur (a fancy name intended to be Persian) i. 93.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ja’ídiyah (<em>Arab.</em>) a favourite word in this MSS. = “Sharpers,” iv. 14, 280.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jáizah (viaticum) = a day and night, vi. 26.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Jalabí” (in text) afterwards written “Shalabí,” v. 335.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jalak, the older name of Damascus, the “Smile of the Prophet,” vi. 167.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jálínús = “Galen” (considered by Moslems a pre-Islamitic saint) i. 284.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jám = either mirror or cup (meaning doubtful) iii. 440.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jama’a atráfa-h, <em>lit.</em> = he drew in his extremities (<em>tr.</em> “covered his hands and feet with his dress”) i. 114.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jamal fálij = the palsy-camel, ii. 235.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Jamarát of the Arabs” = Banú Numayr, Banú Háris, and Banú Dabbah, vi. 7.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jámi’ = cathedral mosque, i. 250.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jámí al-Amawí (<em>Arab.</em>) Cathedral Mosque of the Ommiades, one of the Wonders of the Moslem World, vi. 172.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jám-i-Jamshíd, a well-worn commonplace in Moslem folk-lore, iii. 440.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jamíl bin Ma’mar al-Uzri. (“Jamíl the Poet,” and lover of Buthaynah), i. 41.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jamrah = a bit of burning charcoal, ii. 122.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = a live coal, ii. 87.</li>
				<li class="c029">“——” (<em>Arab.</em>) a word of doubtful origin, applied to a self dependent tribe (<em>tr.</em> “live coal”) vi. 7.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jámúsah (<em>Arab.</em>) = buffalo-cow, iv. 26.</li>
				<li class="c029">Janákilah = gypsies, iv. 72.</li>
				<li class="c029">Janánan may also read “Jinánan” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) vi. 138.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (? <em>vulg.</em> form of “Jannatan” = the garden (of Paradise)) <em>tr.</em> “the garths of Paradise,” vi. 138.</li>
				<li class="c029">Janázah, bier with a corpse thereon, iv. 289.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jarazat Kuzbán (<em>pl.</em> of Kazíb) = long and slender sticks, vi. 76.</li>
				<li class="c029">Janínáti Al- = the market gardener, v. 293.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jánn, Al- (MS. preserves rare form of, for the singular) iv. 88.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jannat al-Khuld (<em>Arab.</em>) = the Eternal Garden, v. 172.</li>
				<li class="c029">Janzír (vulgarism for “Zanjír”) = a chain, i. 20.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jaríd = The Cane-play, iii. 327.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— or reed used as a javelin, iv. 173.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— <em>pop.</em> Jeríd = the palm-frond used as javelin, iii. 145.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jarídah (<em>Arab.</em>), = Palm-frond stripped of its leaves, i. 264; iv. 173.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jarír al-Khatafah, i. 39.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jarír bin ’Abd al-Masíh (Mutalammis, a poet of The Ignorance) vi. 94.</li>
				<li class="c029">Járiyah = damsel, slave-girl, used instead of “Sabiyah” = young lady, i. 134.</li>
				<li class="c029">Járiyah rádih, Al-, <em>tr.</em> “the good graces of her mistress,” v. 161.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jarmúk, son of “Ashur,” vi. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jarrah (<em>Arab.</em>) = flask, v. 321.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jashísh = coarsely ground wheat (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 347.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jatháni = the wife of an elder brother (<em>tr.</em> “sister-in-law”) iii. 373.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jauhar = the jewel, the essential nature of a substance (<em>tr.</em> “quintessence”) i. 212.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jauhar-jí (<em>Arab.</em>) a Turkish form for Jauharí, iv. 21.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jauharjíyyah, <em>tr.</em> jewellers (an Arab. pl. of an Arabised Turkish sing.—ji for—chí = (crafts) man) iii. 95.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jawádit Al- = animals freshly slain, vi. 257.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jawákín (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>pl.</em> of Arab. Jaukán for <em>Pers.</em> “Chaugán,” a crooked stick (used in Polo), vi. 125.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jáwar = he became a Mujáwir (one who lives near a collegiate mosque) i. 196.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jáwúsh (<em>Arab.</em>) for Cháwush (<em>Turk.</em>) = an army sergeant, etc., iv. 45.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jay’a Al- = the onyx (a well-omened stone) v. 130.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Jayb” = the breast of a gown, also used in sense of a pocket, vi. 42.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jayyid, <em>der.</em> from root “Jaud” = to excel. (<span class="sc">St.</span>) vi. 5.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jazdán = a pen-case (<em>Pers.</em>) more prop. called Kalamdán = a reed box, iv. 322.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jazirah = insula, island, used in the sense of “peninsula,” ii. 220.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jazírah (Al-) (<em>Arab.</em>) = Mesopotamia, iii. 269. <ul><li>“Jews hold lawful to them the good of Moslems.” (Comparison of Jew and Christian in matters relating to dealing) iii. 93.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c029">Jazr = cutting, strengthening, flow (of tide) v. 203.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jehovah, the tribal deity of the Jews, vi. 4.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jerusalem, Temple of, a <i><span xml:lang="la">fac simile</span></i> of the orig. built by Jehovah in the lowest heaven, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, that of the moon, vi. 105.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jewel inserted in the shoulder, i. 228.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jewels (luminous) iii. 354.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jeweller, held to be one of the dishonest classes, iv. 21.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jiddan (Egypto-Syrian) = muchly, i. 115.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jiház (<em>Arab. Egypt.</em> “Gaház”) = marriage portion, v. 28.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Jílan ba’da Jíl” the latter word = revolutions, change of days, tribe, people,</li>
				<li class="c029">v. 476.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jím (j) with 3 dots, a Persian letter still preserved in Arabic alphabets of Marocco, etc., vi. 182.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jink of Egypt (called by Turkish soldiers Ghiovendé) iv. 72.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jinn (<em>Arab.</em>) = spirit or energy of a man, vi. 183.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— “Curiosity,” vi. 62.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— -mad (or in Persian “Parí-stricken,”—smitten by the fairies) v. 249.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jinns of Northern Europe, ii. 86.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jinníyah = the Jinn feminine, iii. 470.</li>
				<li class="c029">Joanna Papissa (Pope John VIII. called “Pope Joan”) i. 340.</li>
				<li class="c029">Job (traditions of) ii. 50.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jugular veins (esp. the external pair) carry blood to the face, and are subject abnormally to the will, v. 340.</li>
				<li class="c029">Julnár = Gulnare, ii. 100.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jumlatun min al-mál = Worth a mint of money, iv. 59.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jummayz (<em>Arab.</em>) = a tall sycamore tree, v. 117.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jund (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>pl.</em> “Junúd” = “guards,” a term mostly applied to regular troops under Government, vi. 16.</li>
				<li class="c029">Juráb al-’uddah (<em>Arab.</em>) <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, The manacles, fetters, etc., vi. 78.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Júrah Syán” for “Jurah sayyál” = a stinking fosse a-flowing, vi. 35.</li>
				<li class="c005">Ká’ah (<em>Arab.</em>) = the apodyterium or undressing room upon which the vestibule of the Hammam opens (<em>tr.</em> “great hall”) iii. 133.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = a saloon, vi. 61.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ka’b = heel, glory, prosperity, i. 21.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kabá (<em>Pers.</em>) = a short coat or tunic, vi. 48.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kababjí (for “Kabábji”), seller of Kabábs (<em>tr.</em> “cook”) v. 225.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kabad = liver, sky vault, the handle or grip of a bow (<em>tr.</em> here “belly” of the bow), vi. 257.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kabbaltu = I have accepted, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, I accept emphatically, iii. 37.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kabdán (usual form “Kaptán” from <em>Ital.</em> “Capitano”) = Captain (ship’s) (Turk. form, as in “Kapúdán-pashá” Lord High Admiral of ancient Osmanli land), v. 402.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kábil-ki (? <em>cler.</em> error for Kátil-ki = Allah strike thee dead) <em>tr.</em> “Allah requite thee,” vi. 55.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kabírah = head of the household (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, the mother), vi. 83.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kabr al-Sitt, wherein Sitt Zaynab is supposed to lie buried (<em>tr.</em> “Lady’s Tomb”), vi. 171.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kabsh (<em>Arab.</em>) = ram, v. 299.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kabút (<em>pl.</em> Kabábít) = “Capotes,” v. 274.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kad = verily (affirmative particle preceding a verb gives it a present and at times a future signification) i. 245.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kadíd Al- (<em>Arab.</em>) = jerked meat flesh smoked, or sun-dried (<em>tr.</em> “boucan’d meat”) v. 51.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kadr = rank, i. 48.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kádúm for “Kudúm” (Syrian form) to “adze,” iv. 101.</li>
				<li class="c029">Káfi’ah Al- = parapet, vi. 72.</li>
				<li class="c029">Káfir (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, a non-Moslem) Everything fair in dealing with, iv. 316.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kahana (<em>Heb.</em>) = he ministered (priests’ offices or other business) vi. 109.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kahbah = whore, i. 12.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = our whore (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> hired woman), vi. 46.</li>
				<li class="c029">Káhin, usual plurals of, are Kahanah and Kuhhán (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 320.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = a Cohen, a Jewish Priest, a soothsayer, vi. 109.</li>
				<li class="c029">Káhinah = Divineress (fem. of Káhin), i. 279.</li>
				<li class="c029">Káhirah = City of Mars, Cairo, iv. 35.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kahramán (<em>alias</em> Samarbán) (W. M. MS.) iv. 6.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kahramánah = housekeeper (also nurse, duenna, &amp;c. &amp;c.) i. 199.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (<em>Arab.</em>) = a nurse, a duenna, an Amazon guarding the Harem, iv. 78.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— a word of many senses, vi. 89.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ká’id; <em>lit.</em> = one who sits with a colleague (<em>tr.</em> “Captain”) i. 59.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Káík” and “Káík-jí” the well-known Caïque of the Bosphorous, v. 236.</li>
				<li class="c029">Káim-makám = a deputy (governor, etc.) v. 281.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ka’ka’ = “jingle and jangle” (of horses’ tramp) vi. 131.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Káká Siyáh” (<em>Pers.</em>), <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “black brother” (a domestic negro), see his Názi-núzí, iii. 285.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kála al-Ráwí, etc., parenthetical formula = “The Story-teller sayeth, etc.,” i. 347.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kalak (<em>Arab.</em>), <em>lit.</em> = agitation, disquietude (used as syn. with Kúlanj = a true colic), iv. 177.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kála’l-Ráwi = the reciter saith, v. 64.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— ’l-Ráwí = quoth the reciter, vi. 227.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kál (al-Ráwí) = “the Reciter saith” (a formula omitted here), vi. 15.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kalamdán = reed box. iv. 322.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kalamátu ’llah = the Koran, iv. 252.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Kalansuwah”-cap—a distinguishing mark of the Coptic regular clergy, iv. 34.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kalb = stomach (sometimes “heart”) i. 26.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (for “Kulbat”) = a cave, a cavern (<em>tr.</em> “conduit”) iv. 214.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kalí = potash (our “alcali”) i. 8.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kalím = one who speaks with another, a familiar, v. 203.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kalímu’llah = Title of Moses, on account of the Oral Law and conversations at Mount Sinai, v. 203.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kám Khudáí = master of his passions, iii. 269.</li>
				<li class="c029">Káma (<em>Arab.</em>) = he rose; <em>equiv. to</em> “he began” in vulg. speech, iii. 389.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— -Shástra = the Cupid gospel, iii. 429.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kamar al-Ashráf = Moon of the Nobles, vi. 226.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Zamán (“Moon of the Time”), vi. 233.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kamariyah (<em>der. from</em> Kamar = Moon) = coloured glass windows, ii. 39</li>
				<li class="c029">“Kamá zukira fí Dayli-h” = “Let it be, as is said, in the tail,” vi. 126.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kamburisíyah = clotted curd, vi. 159.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kamal (<em>Arab.</em>) = Louse, vi. 99.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kamís (<span xml:lang="grc">χιτών</span>, chemise, etc.) = shirt, i. 346.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kamrah = the chief cabin (from <em>Gr.</em> <span xml:lang="grc">καμάρα</span> = vault), <em>tr.</em> “cuddy,” v. 24</li>
				<li class="c029">Kanání (<em>plur.</em> of Kinnínah) = glass bottle, iii. 92.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kanát (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>tr.</em> water-leat, iv. 350.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kandíl (Al-) al-’ajíb = the Wonderful Lamp, iii. 135.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kanísah = a Pagan temple, a Jewish synagogue, a Christian Church, i. 198.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kapú = a door, a house, or a Government office, vi. 179.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Katkhúdási = the agent which every Governor is obliged to keep at Constantinople, vi. 180.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kapúdán-pashá = Lord High Admiral of ancient Osmanli land, v. 402.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kapújí = a porter. Kapújí-báshí = head porter, vi. 179.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kár’ah, now usually called “Maslakh” = stripping room, iii. 133.</li>
				<li class="c029">Karawán = crane or curlew (<em>Charadrius œdicnemus</em>) v. 151.</li>
				<li class="c029">Karb, one of whose meanings is “to inflate the stomach,” iv. 182.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kárdán (Persian) = Business-knower, i. 94.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kárishín = chasing, being in hot pursuit of (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 405.</li>
				<li class="c029">Karít (✓ Kart) = complete, speaking of a year, etc. (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 337.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kariyah = a village (derivation) i. 83.</li>
				<li class="c029">Karkabah (<em>Arab.</em>), Clerical error for Karkarah = driving; rumbling of wind in bowels, iv. 182.</li>
				<li class="c029">Karm (✓), originally means cutting a slip of skin from the camel’s nose by way of mark, v. 266.</li>
				<li class="c029">Karmán = Karmania, vulg. and fancifully derived from Kirmán. Pers. = worms, i. 59.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kart = complement, or here, “remainder,” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 337.</li>
				<li class="c029">Karúr = a crore, iii. 129.</li>
				<li class="c029">Karz (<em>Arab.</em>) = moneys lent in interest without fixed term of payment, as <em>opp.</em> to “Dayn,” vi. 29.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kasalah = a shock of corn, assemblage of sheaves, v. 53.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— may be cler. error for “Kasabah” = stalk, haulm, straw, v. 53.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kas’at (=a wooden platter or bowl) Mafrúkah, <em>tr.</em> “hand-robbed flour,” v. 349.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kasf = houghed, i. 155.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kashákish (<em>Arab.</em>), from the quadril. ✓ Kashkasha = he gathered fuel (<em>here tr.</em> “fuel sticks”) iii. 67.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kash’am, a term having various sigs., iv. 183.</li>
				<li class="c029">Káshán (Well of), proverbial for its depth, vi. 127.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Kashmar,” a word not to be found in dictionary, iv. 25.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kasht = skinning (a camel) ✓ of Mikshat (<em>Arab.</em>), iv. 100.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kashshara = grinned a ghastly smile (also laughing so as to shew the teeth), v. 461.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kásid = messenger, ii. 37.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kasím (an unusual word), <em>tr.</em> “tax tribute,” vi. 18.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kasír (the Little one) iii. 390.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kásituna (Al-) = The Swervers, i. 52.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kasr = abbreviation, i. 295.</li>
				<li class="c029">Katá = sand-grouse, v. 151.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Kata’ al-arba’,” or cutting off the four members, equiv. to our “quartering,” v. 96.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kata’a Judúr-há (for “hú”) <em>tr.</em> “backbone,” v. 353.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Dr. Steingass refers pronoun in “Judúr-há” <em>tr.</em> “Rabakah,” taking the “roots of the neck,” <em>tr.</em> = spine) v. 353.</li>
				<li class="c029">Katá grouse, vi. 65.</li>
				<li class="c029">(Kataba) Zayjata-há = marriage-writ, vi. 259.</li>
				<li class="c029">Katáif (<em>pl.</em>) = Katífah-cakes, a kind of pancake, vi. 45.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kátil-ki = Allah strike thee dead, vi. 55.</li>
				<li class="c029">Katalú-ní = they killed me, vi. 185.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kattán = linen, flax (<em>tr.</em> “linen web”) iv. 104.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kattu from “Katta” = he cut (in breadth, as opposed to Kadda = he cut lengthwise) iii. 52.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kauk (Káka, yakúku) to chuck, iv. 203.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kauk = an aquatic bird with a long neck, iv. 203.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kaunayn (<em>Arab.</em>) = the two entities, this world and other world (<em>tr.</em> here “Two Beings”) vi. 249.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kauri (or “Cowrie,” <em>Cypræa moneta</em>), iii. 348.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kaus al-Bunduk (or Bundúk) (<em>Arab.</em>) = a pellet-bow (<em>Ital.</em> arcobugio, <em>Eng.</em> arquebuse), vi. 53.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kawá’ib Al- = High-breasted (also P. N. of the river) v. 176.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kawá’ib Al- (A P.N. of word unknown to author); <em>lit.</em> meaning “of high-breasted virgins,” v. 129.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kawání al- (<em>pl.</em> of Kanát) = the spears (<em>tr.</em> here “punishment”), also read “al-Ghawání” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) vi. 147.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kawárijí (<em>Arab.</em>) = one who uses the paddle, a rower (<em>tr.</em> “boatman”) iii. 18.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kawík (<em>Arab.</em>) = magpie, iv. 203.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kawwárah, <em>tr.</em> “Sherd” (not found in dictionary) iv. 179.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Kayasirah” (Cæsars) <em>opp.</em> to Akásirah, (kisras) ii. 263.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kayf, favourite word in Egypt and Syria, i. 58.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— a tranquil enjoyment, iv. 196.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = joy, the pleasure of living, vi. 174.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kaylúlah = Siesta, iv. 324.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kayrawán = Curlew, ii. 93.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kazafa (<em>Arab.</em>) = threw up, vomited, vi. 135.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kazánát (<em>pl.</em> of “Kázán”) = crucibles (opp. to Kawálib = moulds) v. 108.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kázánát Al- (<em>pl.</em> of Kázán) = chauldrons (<em>Turk.</em> “Kazghán”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 25.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kazázah = vulg. a (flask of) glass, iv. 179.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kazdír, may here allude to the canisters used by small shopkeepers (<em>tr.</em> “tin”) iv. 338.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kázi, ex-officio guardian of the orphans and their property liable to punishment in case of Fraud, ii. 10.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kází al-Askar = the great legal authority of a country (<em>tr.</em> “Kazi of the Army”) v. 310.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kázi bade ancient dame precede him (on reaching door), lest he happen to meet an unveiled woman upon the upper stairs, vi. 58.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kazzák = Cossacks, bandits, etc. (<em>here tr.</em> “pirates”) iii. 288.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kbb (possibly “Kubb” for “Kubbah”) = a vault, a cupola, v. 376.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kerchief, throwing the, iv. 264.</li>
				<li class="c029">Keyhole (Eastern) cannot be spied through, the holes being in the bolt, vi. 54.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khabata = “He (the camel) pawed the ground” (<em>tr.</em> “beateth the bough”) vi. 28.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khálata-há al-Khajal wa ’l-Hayá = shame and abasement mixed with her, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “suffused or overwhelmed her” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 399.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khálat-kí insánun (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>tr.</em> “(some man) has mixed with thee”; meaning also “to lie with,” v. 398.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Dr.Steingass also explains and translates), v. 376.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khalbas (suggests Khalbús) = a buffoon i. 266.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khalífah (Caliph) = a deputy, a successor, (derivation) i. 4.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (never written “Khalíf”) = a viceregent or vicar, v. 64.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khalíj (Al-) The Canal (Grand Canal of Cairo) ii. 286.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khalíyáh = beehive and empty, iv. 222.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khallí-ná nak’ud (<em>Arab.</em>) = let us sit together (a thoroughly modern expression) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 475.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Khamr al-’ukár” (=choice wine) v. 137.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khams Ghaffár = “five pardoners” (Steingass reads Khamr. (=wine) ’ukár another name for wine, as in “Al-Khamr al-’ukár” = choice wine) v. 137.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khanádik = ditches or trenches (for Fanádik, “khans”) i. 288.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kharrat (in text) = tripping and stumbling (in her haste), v. 253.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (also may be meant for “Kharajat” = “she went out”) (<em>St.</em>) v. 253.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khátá = Cathay = China, v. 27.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khatíb = a preacher (not Kátíb = a writer), vi. 240.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khatíbah (<em>more usually</em> “Khutbah”) = the Friday sermon preached by the Khatíb, iii. 492.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khatt Hajar, a province, vi. 230.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khaufu (Al-) maksúm = cowardice is equally divided, iv. 245.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khawábi (<em>Arab.</em>) (<em>pl.</em> of Khábiyah) = large jars usually of pottery, iii. 11.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khawátín (<em>pl.</em> of Khátún) = a matron, a lady, i. 122.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Khayr” (<em>Arab.</em>) = “’Tis well,” a word of good omen, vi. 58.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Nassáj (the Weaver) i. 344.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Kathír = This is right good (also “abundant kindness”), ii. 275.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khayyál = sturdy horseman, i. 320.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— kabr-hu maftúh” (proverb) i. 320.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khazíb-dye, v. 200.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khaznah = the Treasury = 1,000 kis or purses, each 500 piastres, £5,000, iv. 74, 180.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Khazínah) or 10,000 Kís each = £5, v. 236.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khaznat al-Siláh (<em>Arab.</em>) = the ship’s armoury, v. 403.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khil’ah = robe of honour, consists of many articles, such as a horse, sword, etc., iv. 235; v. 410.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khila’h dakk al-Matrakah, <em>tr.</em> “whereon plates of gold were hammered” (an especial kind of brocade) vi. 81.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khimár (<em>Arab.</em>) = head-veil (a covering for the back of the head), v. 255.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khizr = the Green Prophet, v. 301.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khorasan (including our Afghanistan) in a chronic state of rebellion in Al-Rashid’s reign, ii. 167.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khubz mutabbak = platter-bread, i. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Samíz = firsts bread, i. 261.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khudá, <em>mod. Pers.</em> form of Old Khudáí = Sovereign-King, iii. 269.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khudadad (derivation), iii. 269.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— and his brothers,” position of, compared with Galland, iii. 303.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— relative position of, iii. 269.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khutbah = sermon, i. 350.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khurtúm = the trunk of an elephant, iii. 19.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khuwáj = hunger, iii. 61.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Khwájá” for “Khwájah,” iii. 61.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khwájah = merchant and gentleman, iii. 61.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— is also a honorific title given by Khorásánis to their notables, iii. 61.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— and Khawáját (<em>Pers.</em>) = merchants (<em>Arab.</em>), i. 332.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (spelt elsewhere “Khwájá”), iv. 50; <ul><li>corresponds with our “good man,” iv. 62.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c029">—— Hasan al-Habbál = Master Hasan the Ropemaker, iii. 341.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kíb (<em>pl.</em> “Kiyáb” and “Akyáb”) = a small thick mat used to produce shade (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 215.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kidnapping (by Dervishes) iv. 153.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kidr = a cooking pot, i. 48.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kikán (<em>pl.</em> of Kík) <em>tr.</em> “raven,” vi. 147.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kimcobs = velvets with gold embroidery, iii. 140.</li>
				<li class="c029">King’s Eye = Royal favour, i. 61.</li>
				<li class="c029">King consummates his marriage in presence of his virgin sister-in-law, ii. 268.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Kulayb (“little dog”) al Wá’il, ii. 263.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Nabhán, ii. 192.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— of the Kingdoms (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> of the worlds visible and invisible), ii. 6.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— of Bashan, iii. 19.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— in Persia speaks of himself in third person, and swears by his own head, etc., iii. 531.</li>
				<li class="c029">“King’s Command is upon the head and the eyes” = must be obeyed, iii. 164.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kinnab = hemp, vi. 62.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kinship, Terms of, iii. 373.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kintár = a quintal, 98 to 99 lbs. avoir. (in round numbers, a cwt.) vi. 29.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kiosque, traced through the <em>Turk.</em> Kúshk (<em>pron.</em> Kyúshk) to the <em>Pers.</em> “Kushk” = an upper chamber, iv. 151.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— or belvedere (used to avoid confusion between Kiosque and window) iii. 140.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kirámát = miracles, iii. 181.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kírát (Carat), most often one twenty-fourth of the dinar, iii. 91.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kirm Al- (<em>Arab.</em> and <em>Pers.</em>) = a worm, vi. 5.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kirsh (<em>pron.</em> “Girsh”) the Egyptian piastre = one-fifth of a shilling, iv. 72; 281.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (<em>Arab.</em>), pop. “Girsh” = a dollar, iv., 281.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = piastre, v. 226.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (<em>Arab.</em>) = piastre, vi. 175.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kis = purse = 500 piastres = £5, iv. 74.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kís = usually the <em>Giberne</em> or pellet-bag (here the “bow-cover”) vi. 53.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kishk = ground wheat, eaten with sheep’s milk soured, etc., vi. 160.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kisra = Kutrú (Bresl.) Kassera (Chavis and Cazotte) i. 60.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kisrá = Chosroës, i. 97.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Kisrat al-yábisah ’ala ’l-Rík, etc.” = a slice of dry bread on the spittle, for it absorbs ... phlegm on the mouth of the stomach (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 51.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Kissing him upon the mouth,” i. 153.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— the hand, the action of a servant or slave ii. 81.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kitáb = book, written bond, ii. 27.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kit’ah humrah = a small quantity of red brickdust to which wonderful medicinal powers are ascribed (<span class="sc">St.</span>) vi. 125.</li>
				<li class="c029">Knife and salt placed on the stomach (<em>Ar.</em> Kalb) to repel evil spirits, i. 26.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Kohl’d her eyes,” v. 292.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kohl-powder, v. 292.</li>
				<li class="c029">Koran quoted—i. 25, 51, 52, 100, 134, 148, 353; ii. 215, 175, 270, 271, 197, 177, 106, 101; iv. 201, 242, 252, 254; v. 44, 47, 48, 49, 50, 56, 58, 180, 460; vi. 100, 104, 156, 157.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kubbah = a dome-shaped tent (<em>tr.</em> “Pavilion”) i. 99.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (square building with cupola) i. 119.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = vault, cupola, iv. 290.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Kubbat al-’Asáfír” = the Dome of the Birds, vi. 181.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kubúr = tombs, i. 295.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kuhná, Syriac singular, according to dictionaries (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 320.</li>
				<li class="c029">——, Al- (<em>Arab.</em>), <em>pl.</em> of Káhin = diviner, priest (<em>tr.</em> “Cohens”) iv. 320.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Kúl,” vulg. for “Kul” = “tell me”; a constant form in this MS., vi. 5.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kuláh meant for “Kuláh” a Dervish’s cap (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 108.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kúlanj (<em>Arab.</em>) = a true colic, iv. 177.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Kullu Shayyin lí mu’as’as” = all to me is excitement, vi. 174.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kumájah = First bread (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, Bread unleavened and baked in ashes) i. 8.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kumri = turtle-dove, v. 151.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kunafání = a baker of kunáfah = a vermicelli cake often eaten at breakfast, iv. 127.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kunaym Madúd = Kingdom of Dineroux, i. 55.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kunná nu’tíhu li-ahad = we should have given him to someone (Dr. Steingass also explains) vi. 73.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kunyah (<em>Arab.</em>), the pop. mispronunciation of “Kinyah” = “bye-name” (gen. taken from favourite son, etc.) vi. 83.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kurbáj (<em>Arab.</em>) = Cravache (“Scourge”) iv. 214.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Kurbán-at básham” = May I become thy Corban or Sacrifice (formula used in addressing the Shah) iii. 530.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kursí = Throne, i. 10.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kursí (<em>Arab.</em>), here = a square wooden seat without back, used for sitting cross-legged (<em>tr.</em> “chair”) iv. 52.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kursí stool = the stool upon which the Síníyah, or tray of tinned copper, is placed, iv. 170.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kurúd = apes (occurring as a rhyme twice in three couplets) v. 190.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kurúsh (<em>Arab.</em>), <em>pl.</em> of Kirsh, the Egyptian piastre = one-fifth of a shilling, iv. 72.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kút = food not to be confounded with “Kuwwat” = force, iv. 225.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Kulúb, iv. 225.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kutb (Al-) al-Ghauth (<em>Arab.</em>) = <em>lit.</em> “The pole-star of invocation for help” (<em>tr.</em>“Prince of the Hallows”) the highest degree of sanctity in the mystic fraternity of Tasawwuf, v. 426.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kuthayyir = “the dwarf,” i. 41.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— ’Azzah (contemporary of Jamíl), i. 41.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kuwárah = that which is cut off from the side of a thing, iv. 179.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kuwayyis (dim. of Kaus), much used in Egypt as an adj. for “pretty,” etc., iv. 350.</li>
				<li class="c005">La’ab al-Andáb (<em>Arab.</em>) = javelin-play, iii. 154.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lá af’al (“I will do naught of the kind”) more commonly Má af’al, i. 296.</li>
				<li class="c029">La’alla = peradventure (used to express expectation of possible occurrence) ii. 20.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lá baas = “No matter” or “All right,” (<em>tr.</em> “No harm be upon you”) i. 160.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Haula = there is no Majesty, etc., v. 359.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— Haul of Allah is upon thee,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, it is a time when men should cry for thy case, v. 359.</li>
				<li class="c029">La-hu Diráah (for Diráyah = prudence) fí tabírí’l-mulúk = <em>tr.</em> “Also he had control,” v. 465.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Lá iláha illa ’llah,” the refrain of Unity, v. 403.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— khuzitat Ayday al-Firák,” meaning, “May Separation never ornament herself in sign of gladness at the prospect of our parting,” v. 200.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— tafzah-ní = Do not rend <em>my</em> reputation. (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 295.</li>
				<li class="c029">Laban = milk soured (<em>tr.</em> “Curd”) ii. 54.</li>
				<li class="c029">Laban, pop. word for milk artificially soured, v. 352.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— halíb (a trivial form) = sweet milk, v. 352.</li>
				<li class="c029">La’bat Shawáribu-hu = <em>lit.</em> “his mustachios played” (<em>tr.</em> “curled”) v. 273.</li>
				<li class="c029">Labbah (<em>Arab.</em>), usually part of the throat where ornaments are hung or camels stabbed (<em>tr.</em> “necklace”) iv. 68.</li>
				<li class="c029">Labbayka = here am I (<em>tr.</em> “Here I stand”) iv. 317.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Laffa ’l-isnayn bi-zulúmati-h” = <em>tr.</em> winding his trunk around them (latter word = Khurtúm the trunk of an elephant) iii. 19.</li>
				<li class="c029">Laght (also <em>pron.</em> Laghat), a synonym of “Jalabah” = clamour, tumult. (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 342.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lahd, Luhd = tomb-niche, i. 292.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lájawardí, <em>tr.</em> “lapis lazuli,” iii. 444.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lajlaja = tied (his tongue was) ii. 186.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lakasha = be conversed with, v. 285.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— one of the words called “Zidd,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, with opposite meanings, v. 285.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lakh (Anglicised “lac”) = 100,000, iii. 357.</li>
				<li class="c029">Laklaka-há (<em>Arab.</em>), an onomatopœia, v. 265.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Lam yakthir Khayrak”; this phrase (<em>pron.</em> “Kattir Khayrak”) is the Egypt. and Moslem. equiv. for our “thank you,” v. 60.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— yanúb al-Wáhidu min-hum nisf haffán,” <em>tr.</em> “each took his turn thereat and drank without drinking his full,” v. 11.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Dr. Steingass explains and translates, “And none took his turn without sipping a few laps.” v. 11.</li>
				<li class="c029">La-nakhsifanna = I would assuredly, ii. 23.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lane, quoted, i. 3, 10, 11, 13, 16, 17, 21, 29. 31, 34, 146, 290; ii. 246; iii. 38, 119, 334, 492; iv. 19, 29, 34, 43, 45, 55, 56, 122, 209, 243, 257, 293, 296; v. 28, 86, 90, 97, 226, 265, 291, 351, 363, 426; vi. 46, 53, 74, 178.</li>
				<li class="c029">Last march (to the next world) ii. 202.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lauh = tablet (of the heart) iii. 386.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Lawá’a-hu,” a clerical error for “láwa’a-hu.” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 306.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lawwaha (<em>Arab.</em>) = <em>lit.</em> pointing out, making clear (<em>tr.</em> “bobbed”) iv. 190.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— -hu,” a conjectured reading for “lawá’a-hu.” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 306.</li>
				<li class="c029">Laysa fi ’l-diyári dayyár = “nor is there a wight in the site” (a favourite jingle) ii. 275.</li>
				<li class="c029">Learned men exorcising some possible “Evil Spirit” or “the Eye,” a superstition begun with the ancient Egyptians, iv. 60.</li>
				<li class="c029">Learn from thyself what is thy Lord (Sufi language) = in Gr. <span xml:lang="grc">γνῶθι σεαυτόν</span>, and corresponding with our “looking up through nature to nature’s God,” v. 276.</li>
				<li class="c029">Leather from Al-Táif, ii. 242.</li>
				<li class="c029">Legal defects (which justify returning a slave to the slave-dealer) ii. 141.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lens, origin of, and its applied use in telescopes and microscopes, iii. 432.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Letters of Mutalammis” (“Uriah’s letters”) are a <i><span xml:lang="fr">lieu commun</span></i> in the East, vi. 94.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lex talionis (the essence of Moslem and all criminal jurisprudence) i. 100.</li>
				<li class="c029">Liallá (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, li, an, lá) = lest, i. 140.</li>
				<li class="c029">Libás (<em>Arab.</em>) = clothes in general (<em>tr.</em> “habit”) vi. 103.</li>
				<li class="c029">Libwah = lioness, i. 152.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lieutenant of the bench, ii. 24.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lijám (Al-) w’al-Bílám = the latter being a Tábi’ or dependent word used only for a jingle, v. 381.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lilláhi durrak = Gifted of Allah, ii. 200.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lion lashing flank with tail, iv. 160.</li>
				<li class="c029">Litám = the mouth-band for man (<em>tr.</em> “Litham”) v. 139.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lithám = the coquettish fold of transparent muslin used by women in Stambul, ii. 172.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Live thy head, O King, for ever and aye!” (a formula announcing death of supposed enemy) vi. 17.</li>
				<li class="c029">Líwán (<em>Arab.</em>) = Saloon, iii. 71.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-barrání (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>lit.</em> = the outer bench in the “Maslakh” or apodyterium (<em>tr.</em> “outside the calidarium”) iv. 56.</li>
				<li class="c029">Liyah (? Liyyah) = Lign-aloes, vi. 125.</li>
				<li class="c029">Líyúth (pl. of Layth) = Lions (used for “warriors”) i. 14.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lodging in the Khan, vi. 95.</li>
				<li class="c029">Long hand, or arm, means power (Arab. idiom) i. 114.</li>
				<li class="c029">Long lock left on shaven poll, i. 233.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Look-at-me-and-thou-shalt-know-me” (compound name) v. 276.</li>
				<li class="c029">Love-fit distinguished by the pulse or similar obscure symptoms, vi. 174.</li>
				<li class="c029">Love (for “sleep”) ii. 164.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Love thy friends and hate thy foes,” the religion of nature, vi. 34.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lovers dressing themselves up and playing the game of mutual admiration, v. 153.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lovers of Al-Hayfá and Yúsuf (note concerning) v. 123.</li>
				<li class="c029">Low-caste and uneducated men rise suddenly to a high degree, vi. 194.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Loz” (<em>Heb.</em> and “Lauz” <em>Arab.</em>) = fruit of the Almond-tree = <em>Amygdalus communis</em>, vi. 7.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Luh” = to him for “Lí” = to me, iv. 282.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lukmah (<em>Arab.</em>) = a balled mouthful (<em>tr.</em> “morsels”) v. 264.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lúlúah = The Pearl or Wild Heifer, ii. 95.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lume eterno (of the Rosicrucians) = little sepulchral lamps, burned by the Hebrews, Greeks and Romans, iii. 72.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Luss,” is after a fashion <span xml:lang="grc">λῃστὴς</span> (the Greek word however includes piracy while the Arab term is mostly applied to petty larcenists), v. 337.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lute, beautiful song of the, v. 152.</li>
				<li class="c005">Ma’adabah = wake or funeral feast before death, vi. 16.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ma’ádin (<em>Arab.</em>) = Minerals (<em>tr.</em> “ingredients”) iv. 139.</li>
				<li class="c029">Má al-Fasíkh = water of salt-fish (<em>tr.</em> “dirty brine”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 292.</li>
				<li class="c029">Maamún (Al-) al-Hákim b’Amri’llah = The Secure, the Ruler by Commandment of Allah, ii. 281.</li>
				<li class="c029">Maamún (Al-) Seventh Abbaside (<span class="fss"><abbr epub:type="se:era">AH</abbr></span> 198–227) i. 175.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mabásim (<em>pl.</em> of Mabsim) = a smiling mouth, ii. 162.</li>
				<li class="c029">Madáfi al-Salámah (<em>Arab.</em>) = the cannon of safe arrival, iv. 124.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Made small their sleeves and breasts” = habited themselves in the garments of little people, vi. 42.</li>
				<li class="c029">Madínat al-Andalús = City of Andalús, (usually Seville) v. 402.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Madínat al-Nabi.” City of the Prophet, and vulg. Al-Madínah <em>the</em> City, v. 43.</li>
				<li class="c029">Madmen in hot climates enjoy throwing off their clothes, ii. 22.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mad’úr, here translated (even if thou hadst been) “an invited guest,” v. 41.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— it may also be a synonym and be rendered “as though thou wert a boor or clown” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 41.</li>
				<li class="c029">Máfrúkah (an improvement upon the Fatírah) a favourite dish with the Badawí (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 349.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mafyaat, Al- (<em>Arab.</em>) = <em>lit.</em> “a shady place” (<em>tr. here</em> “mysterious subjects”) iv. 14.</li>
				<li class="c029">Maghárah = a cave, a souterrain, iii. 15.</li>
				<li class="c029">Maghbún <em>usually</em> = deceived, cajoled, v. 366.</li>
				<li class="c029">Maghribi (vulg. Maghrabi) iv. 43.</li>
				<li class="c029">——, the Magician (in classical Arabic “Maghribi = a dweller in the Sunsetland”) iii. 53.</li>
				<li class="c029">Maghrib = set of sun, v. 151.</li>
				<li class="c029">Maháshim (<em>acc.</em> to Bocthor, is a <em>pl.</em> without a singular, meaning “<span xml:lang="fr">les pàrties de la génération</span>”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 359.</li>
				<li class="c029">Maháshima-k = good works, merits (in a secondary sense, beard, mustachios) <em>tr.</em> here “yard,” v. 359.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mahazzin (for Maházim) al Zerdukkaut (for al-Zardakhán) according to Scott “Saffron—yoke of eggs, etc.;” according to Lane “apron napkins of thick silk” (<em>tr. here</em> “silken napkins”) iv. 55–56.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mahdi (Al-) Third Abbaside (<span class="fss"><abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr></span> 775–785) i. 165.</li>
				<li class="c029">Máh-i-Khudáí = the sovereign moon, iii. 269.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mahkamah, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, the Kazi’s Court-house, iv. 169.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Place of Judgment) or Kazi’s Court at Cairo, mostly occupied with matrimonial disputes, v. 363.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mahmá = as often as = Kullu má, vi. 54.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Mahmud the Persian and the Kurd Sharper,” a poor version of “Ali the Persian and the Kurd Sharper,” iv. 242.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mahr = marriage settlement, i. 283.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = dowry, settled by the husband upon the wife, v. 28.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ma’húd min ghayr Wa’d, Al- (<em>Arab.</em>) = “the door where the appointment had taken place without risk threatened,” iv. 66.</li>
				<li class="c029">Maidenhead, taking it held to be porter’s work, iv. 57. Decency compels maidens to show unwillingness in parting with, iv. 135.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mail-coat Davidian (Heron, “A massy cuirass of Haoudi”) vi. 242.</li>
				<li class="c029">Majlis garm karná = to give some life to the company (<em>tr.</em> “to warm them into talk”) iii. 535.</li>
				<li class="c029">Majnún = “A madman,” ii. 22.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ma’jún (<em>Arab.</em>) pop. applied to an electuary of Bhang (<em>Cannabis sativa</em>) (<em>tr.</em> “confections”) iv. 56.</li>
				<li class="c029">Májúr Al- (<em>Arab.</em>) for “Maajúr” = a vessel, an utensil, v. 291.</li>
				<li class="c029">Makán mahjúb = a retired room, i. 11.</li>
				<li class="c029">Makhzúm = nose pierced, i. 47.</li>
				<li class="c029">Making a picture (or statue), which artist cannot quicken, a process demanded on Doomsday, ii. 194.</li>
				<li class="c029">Makrán, the well-known Baloch province West of Sind, i. 335.</li>
				<li class="c029">Makrúh = blameable, not actually damnable, ii. 46.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mál = wealth, i. 47.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = flocks and herbs (in Badawi parlance) iv. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (in text), <em>tr.</em> “coin” (also applied to “hidden treasure” amongst Badawin) v. 313.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— wa Ghawál (<em>Arab.</em>) = moneys and treasures, iv. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— wa Nawál,” iv. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">Malay Aigla = Sandal wood (<em>tr.</em> Eaglewood) iii. 20.</li>
				<li class="c029">Malik Shah = King (Arab.) King (Persian) i. 131.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (King), a title loosely applied in Arabic, ii. 191.</li>
				<li class="c029">Malláh (Al-) = the salting ground, ii. 54.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ma’lúmah (<em>Arab.</em>) = far-famed (may also mean “made known” or “afore-mentioned”) iv. 276.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mameluke (like unto a), <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, well-fed, sturdy, bonny, v. 472.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Beys (dignity forbidding them to walk even the length of a carpet) iii. 177.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mamrak, or small dome built over pavilions (also <em>Pers.</em> “Bádhan”) ii. 82.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = dome-shaped skylight, ii. 39.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ma ’múrah (<em>Arab.</em>) = haunted, v. 118.</li>
				<li class="c029">Man metamorphosed into a woman, vi. 136.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— of Al-kays, the (pre-Islamitic poet) v. 181.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— with El, or God = Israel, vi. 100.</li>
				<li class="c029">Manetho’s account of Moses, vi. 112.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Mandíl” (kerchief) of mercy, iv. 31.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (kerchief) used by women “on the loose” in default of water to wipe away results of car. cop., v. 94.</li>
				<li class="c029">Manjaník (<em>Arab.</em>) from the Greek <span xml:lang="grc">Μάγγα νον</span> or <span xml:lang="grc">Μηχανὴ</span> = a catapult, iv. 117.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mankalah, a favourite game in Egypt, iii. 180.</li>
				<li class="c029">Manná’ = a refuser, a forbidder, v. 185.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mansúrah (Al-) = opinions differ as to the site of, i. 341.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ma’rafah (Al-) = the place where the mane grows (<em>tr.</em> “crest”) i. 298.</li>
				<li class="c029">Marhúm (Al-) = my late brother (<em>tr.</em> “my brother who hath found mercy”) iii. 58.</li>
				<li class="c029">Máristán = Mad house, i. 18.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = The Bedlam, iv. 207.</li>
				<li class="c029">Máriyah (Maria, Mary) a non-Moslem name, ii. 194.</li>
				<li class="c029">Marj = the open grassy space on left bank of Baradah (Damascus) River, vi. 169.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Sali = cleft meadow (here and below) to “Green Meadow,” ii. 227.</li>
				<li class="c029">Marjánah = the “Coralline” (from Marján = red coral), <em>tr.</em> “Morgiana,” iii. 378.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Marham al-akbar, Al-” (<em>Arab.</em>) = the greater salve, v. 51.</li>
				<li class="c029">Markab mausúkah (from ✓ “Wask” = conceiving, being pregnant) v. 474.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— <em>tr.</em> “a vessel in cargo (and about to set sail),” v. 474.</li>
				<li class="c029">Market (Central) = the great Bazar, the Indian “Chauk,” iii. 422.</li>
				<li class="c029">Marmar Sumáki (<em>Arab.</em>) = porphyry of which ancient Egypt supplied finest specimens (<em>tr.</em> “Sumáki marble”) iii. 139.</li>
				<li class="c029">Marocco earliest occurrence of name, ii. 252.</li>
				<li class="c029">Marriages (Morganatic) iii. 33.</li>
				<li class="c029">Marriage portion, v. 28.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Marrying below one,” i. 94.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Martabah” = a mattress, placed upon “Mastabah” (bench) or upon its “Sarír” (framework of jaríd or midribs of the palm) becomes the “Díwan” = Divan, v. 68.</li>
				<li class="c029">Martabán, iv. 204. See Bartamán, iv. 204.</li>
				<li class="c029">Martabat Saltanah (for “Sultániyah”) which may mean a royal Divan, v. 68.</li>
				<li class="c029">Martha and Mary (Fátimah and Halímah) v. 318.</li>
				<li class="c029">Marwazí = Marw (derived from Sansk. Maru or Marw) i. 288.</li>
				<li class="c029">Marzbán = guardian of the Marches, i. 234.</li>
				<li class="c029">Masalah = a question (<em>tr.</em> “catch-question”) i. 138.</li>
				<li class="c029">Masarat fí-há = and she used hard words to her, i. 31.</li>
				<li class="c029">Masbúbah, <em>tr.</em> “Cakes,” v. 347.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mas’h, <em>tr.</em> “robe” (of hair) vi. 157.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mashá’ íli (<em>Arab.</em>) the cresset-bearer, who acted hangman (<em>tr.</em> “Linkman”) iv. 23.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Mashá’ilíyah jaftáwát wa fánúsín” = “(cresset) bearers of double torches and lanterns” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) vi. 67.</li>
				<li class="c029">Masháli = three parallel gashes drawn down cheek of child (to prevent kidnapping) iv. 153.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mashrút Shadak (<em>Arab.</em>) = split-mouthed, iv. 91.</li>
				<li class="c029">Maslakh = stripping room (also Ká’ah) iii. 133.</li>
				<li class="c029">Massage (Greek synonym <span xml:lang="grc">μάσσω</span> and Latin “Massare”) iv. 177.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— needlessly derived from <em>Arab.</em> “Mas’h” = rubbing, kneading, iv. 177.</li>
				<li class="c029">Massa-hu’l Fakr = poverty touched him, vi. 105.</li>
				<li class="c029">Masser, vulg. for Misr, Egypt Grand Cairo; from Misraim, Son of Cham, vi. 25.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mastúrah = veiled (<em>tr.</em> “curtained”) i. 309.</li>
				<li class="c029">Matamor (<em>Arab.</em> “Matmúrah”) = Sardábah, a silo for storing grain, etc., vi. 17.</li>
				<li class="c029">Matáyá Al- = Wight, vi. 162.</li>
				<li class="c029">Matmúrah = a silo, matamor, or “underground cell,” i. 84</li>
				<li class="c029">Maugraby used as an opprobrious term (Fr. <i><span xml:lang="fr">Maugrebleu</span></i>) iv. 43.</li>
				<li class="c029">Maunds (fifty) = about 100 lbs., i. 250.</li>
				<li class="c029">Maut Ahmar = violent or bloody death (<em>tr.</em> “red death”) ii. 11.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mauza’ (<em>Arab.</em>) = a place, an apartment, a saloon (<em>here tr.</em> “hall”) iii. 71.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ma’úzatáni = The two Preventives (two chapters from the Koran) ii. 101.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mawálid (<em>pl.</em> of Maulid) = <em>lit.</em> “nativity festivals,” (<em>here</em> “funeral ceremonies”) ii. 187.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mawázi (<em>pl.</em> of Mauz’) = <em>lit.</em> places, shifts (<em>tr.</em> “positions”) ii. 112.</li>
				<li class="c029">May God never requite thee for me with good (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, Damn your soul for leading me into this danger) ii. 39.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— I not be bereft of these steps = may thy visits never fail me, ii. 110.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— it be fortunate to thee,” a little precatory formula to keep off the Evil Eye, iv. 119.</li>
				<li class="c029">Maydán = plain, iii. 145.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mayzah (<em>Arab.</em>) = the large hall with a central fountain for ablution attached to every great mosque (<em>tr.</em> “lavatory”) v. 458.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mayzar (<em>Pers.</em>) = a turband; in <em>Arab.</em> “Miizar” = a girdle, a waistcloth, vi. 53.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mazarát (<em>Arab.</em>) from ✓ “Mazr” = (an egg) being addled (<em>tr.</em> qualms) iv. 177.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mazbúh = slaughtered for good, v. 159.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mazlúm (Al-) = the wronged, vi. 59.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mazrab Al- = the care of the place, vi. 251.</li>
				<li class="c029">Meccah and Al-Medinah = The two Sanctuaries, ii. 220.</li>
				<li class="c029">Medicine-man (Israelite) always a favourite amongst Moslems and Christians, v. 160.</li>
				<li class="c029">Medinah (Al-), whose title is “Al-Munawwarah” = the Illumined, iii. 58.</li>
				<li class="c029">Merchants wear dagger and sword, ii. 38.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mesmerism (“impose her hand upon his head”) iii. 189.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mesopotamia (<em>Heb.</em> Naharaym, <em>Arab.</em> Al-Jazírah) iii. 269.</li>
				<li class="c029">Met (<em>Sindi</em>) = a kind of clay, iii. 348.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mezzízah = applying styptics to the wound (third operation of circumcision), v. 217.</li>
				<li class="c029">Miat Mamlúk Kitáb (<em>Arab.</em>) latter word meaning “one of the Book, a Jew” or Christian, iv. 85.</li>
				<li class="c029">Miat wa arba’at ’ashar Súrat = the 114 chapters of the Alcoran, i. 147.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mídí, clerical error for “Mayyidí,” an abbreviation of Muayyadí = quarter farthing, iv. 127.</li>
				<li class="c029">Miftáh (prop. “Miftah”) = key used throughout the Moslem East, v. 265.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mihaffah bi-takhtrawán (<em>Arab.</em>) = a covered litter, iii. 33.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mihrján (Al-) = the Autumnal Equinox, i. 129.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Al- (a P.N. not to be confounded with Maháráj = Great Rajah) v. 123.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mihtár, also may mean superintendent, head equerry, chief of military band (<span class="sc">St.</span>) (<em>here tr.</em> “Shaykh of the Pipers”) v. 298.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (in text) = a prince, a sweeper, a scavenger, v. 298.</li>
				<li class="c029">Miizar (<em>Arab.</em>) = a girdle, a waistcloth, vi. 53.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Mík! Mík!” an onomatopy like “Couïc, Couïc,” vi. 158.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mikshat (<em>Arab.</em>) whose ✓ would be “Kasht” = skinning a camel (<em>tr.</em> “Whittle”) iv. 100.</li>
				<li class="c029">Miláh (pleasant) for Mubáh (permitted), iii. 38.</li>
				<li class="c029">Milah = the cut (first operation of circumcision) v. 217.</li>
				<li class="c029">Miláyah = a sheet of cotton used as apparel, iv. 220.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Mi’lakat (pop. cor. for Mil’akat al-Hilál”) may be the spoon or hollow part of an ear-picker (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 108.</li>
				<li class="c029">Milk, specific gravity of, iv. 238.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— and dates, a favourite food, i. 59.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— time (father has no connection with the mother during) iv. 350.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— time was passed (two years) usual time amongst savages and barbarians, iv. 350.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mín (who) for “Man,” a Syro-Egyptian form common throughout the MS., iii. 14.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Min al-’Án wa sá’idan” <em>lit.</em> = from this moment upwards, vi. 189.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Malábis (<em>Arab.</em>) pl. of “Malbas” = anything pleasant or enjoyable, iv. 149.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Malábis (<em>Arab.</em>) pl. of “Milbas” = dress, garment, iv. 149.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— ba’ada-hu (making Jesus of later date than Imr al Kays) v. 199.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— ba’di an” for “Min ba’di má” = after that, iii. 34.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— ghayr Wa’ad = without appointment (<em>tr.</em> “casually”) v. 373.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— Min Hakk la-hu Asl an ’and-ná huná Rájil,” a thoroughly popular phrase = “Of a truth hath any right or reason to say that here in this house is a man?” v. 247.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Dr. Steingass explains and translates) v. 247.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— kuddám-ak” (meaning doubtful), v. 113.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— perhaps it means “from before thee,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, in thy presence (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 113.</li>
				<li class="c029">Míná = a port, both in old Egypt. and mod. Pers., vi. 258.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mi’ráj = ascent to heaven made by Apostle and return therefrom, etc.—History of, vi. 121.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mirror, a compromising magical article of many kinds, iii. 23.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mirrors, made to open and shut in the East, iii. 24.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mirwad = iron axle of pulley, etc.—hence a bar of metal (<em>tr.</em> “ingot”) iv. 142.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mirza Mohammed Husayn Khan, originally a Bakkál (greengrocer) made premier of Fath Ali Shah’s Court, vi. 194.</li>
				<li class="c029">Misallah (<em>pl.</em> “Misáll”) = a large needle for sewing canvas, iv. 288.</li>
				<li class="c029">Miskah = Bit o’ Musk, i. 16.</li>
				<li class="c029">Miskál is the weight of a dinar = 1½ dirham = 71–72 grains avoir., vi. 244.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Misla’l-Kalám” (? a cler. error for “misla ’l-Kiláb”) = as the dogs do (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 282.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— -Khárúf (for “Kharúf”) a common phrase for an innocent, a half idiot, v. 283.</li>
				<li class="c029">Misr = used in a threefold sense for Egypt, old Cairo and new Cairo, iii. 34.</li>
				<li class="c029">Misraim (the dual Misrs) vi. 12.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Misri” here = local name (in India applied exclusively to sugar candy) v. 352.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Mithkála Zarratin” (translations by Author, Rodwell, Houdas and Steingass) v. 48.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Mizr” in Assyrian = “Musur,” in Heb. = “Misraim,” in Arab. “Misr,” corrupted to Masser, vi. 12.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mizwad (or Mizwád) = <em>lit.</em> provision bag, ii. 222.</li>
				<li class="c029">Modesty in story of Alaeddin, iii. 148.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mohammed Ali Pasha (“the Great”) ii. 9.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mohsin = <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, one who does good, a benefactor, v. 321.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Moormen,” famed as Magicians, iii. 54.</li>
				<li class="c029">More cutting = more bewitching, ii. 143.</li>
				<li class="c029">Morier and the literal translation of the “Arabian Nights,” iii. 191.</li>
				<li class="c029">Morning and evening = day and night for ever, ii. 195.</li>
				<li class="c029">Moses (by name Osarsiph = Osiris-Sapi), history of by (Manetho) vi. 112.</li>
				<li class="c029">Moslem school described, iv. 98.</li>
				<li class="c029">Moslems all know how to pray, i. 13.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— bound to see True Believers buried, i. 289.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— make Wuzú-ablution and pray dawn-prayers before doing anything worldly, iii. 141.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— shun a formal oath, i. 304.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— think the more you see of them the more you like them, ii. 208.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mother (all women resembled her); an absurd statement to the West but true in the East, iii. 97.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— the head of the household (Kabírah) vi. 83.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— of Hospitality” is the Sikbáj (<em>Pers.</em> Sikbá) = principal dish set before guests, vi. 159.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— of our Harím = my wife, v. 283.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— of Strengthening” (meat pudding) vi. 159.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— takes rank before the wife, according to Moslem fashion, iii. 301.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Mothers” the prime figures of geomancy, daughters being secondary, iii. 156.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mourning-dress, iv. 248.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mouse, passing over food, makes it impure for a religious Moslem to eat, v. 239.</li>
				<li class="c029">Moyah (in text), or as Fellah of Egypt says “Mayyeh,” or the Cairenne “Mayya” and other forms, v. 323.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Muábalát min shaani-ká” = (From early dawn) I have wearied myself, vi. 178.</li>
				<li class="c029">Muaddib al-Atfál (<em>Arab.</em>) = one who teacheth children, iv. 95.</li>
				<li class="c029">Muajjalah = money paid down before consummation (=£25) ii. 141.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mu’ajjalah = coin paid contingent on divorce (=about £75) ii. 141.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mu’ammarjiyah (master masons) vulg. Egypt. for “Mu’ammarín” (<em>tr.</em> “architects”), iv. 228.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mu’arris = pander, i. 206.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mu’awizzatáni (Al-) “Two Refuge-takings,” iv. 252.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mubáh = an action not sinful (<em>harám</em>) or quasi-sinful (<em>makrúh</em>) (<em>tr.</em> “lawfully”) ii. 12.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mubárak = The blessed or well omened, iii. 13.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mubarbasah (<em>Arab.</em>) in the fem. because referring to noun Tíz = anus (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 291.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mubattat (<em>Arab.</em>) from batt = a duck (<em>tr.</em> “duck-shaped”) iv. 27.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mudáwi Al- = the man of the people who deals in simples, etc. (as opposed to scientific practitioner) v. 326.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mubdi’ = the beginner, the originator, v. 196.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mubtalí Al = sore (leprous), v. 301.</li>
				<li class="c029">Muhandisín = geometricians, architects, for “Muhandisín,” iv. 228.</li>
				<li class="c029">Muhat takáat = usually “with torn veils,” metaphor meaning in disgrace (<em>tr.</em> “unveiled”) ii. 46.</li>
				<li class="c029">Muhibbattu (Al-), <em>fem.</em> or “Muhibb” lover (in Tasawwuf particularly = “lover of God”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 393.</li>
				<li class="c029">Muhjat al-kulúb = “Core” or “Life-blood of hearts,” v. 201.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Muhkaman,” a word never found in the Koran, v. 47.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mu’ín al-Din = “Aider of the Faith,” ii. 5.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mu’izz bi-Díni ’llah, Al- (first Fatimite Caliph raised to the throne of Egypt), tale of, v. 43.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mukábalah, the third form of “Kabil” = requital, retaliation (<span class="sc">St.</span>) vi. 55.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mukabbab (<em>Arab.</em>) = vaulted, arched, &amp;c. (<em>tr. here</em> “heaped”) iv. 9.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mukaddam = Captain, ii. 7.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (<em>Anglo-Indicè</em> “Muccuddum”) = overseer, v. 310.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mukattaf al-Yadayn = arms crossed behind his back (a servile posture) iii. 16.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Mukawwamína (Al-) wa Arbábu ’l Aklám,” the latter usually meaning “scribes skilled in the arts of caligraphy,” v. 374.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mukh, <em>lit.</em> = brain, marrow (<em>tr.</em> “dimple”) v. 86.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mukhaddarát = maidens concealed behind curtains and veiled in the Harem, ii. 265.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mukrif = <em>lit.</em> born of a slave father and free mother (<em>tr.</em> “blamed lad,”) vi. 137.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mulberry-tree in Italy bears leaves till the end of October, and the foliage is as bright as spring verdure, vi. 7.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mulúkhíyá (<em>der.</em> from Gr. <span xml:lang="grc">μαλάχη</span> from <span xml:lang="grc">μαλάσσω</span> = to soften) a favorite vegetable, iv. 176.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mulúkhiyah náshiyah (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>lit.</em> = flowing (<em>tr.</em> “gravied mallows”) iv. 176.</li>
				<li class="c029">Munáfik (<em>Arab.</em>) = “an infidel who pretendeth to believe in Al-Islam” (<em>tr.</em> “hypocrite”) iii. 83.</li>
				<li class="c029">Munajjim = Astrologer (authority in Egyptian townlets) i. 66.</li>
				<li class="c029">Munawwarah (Al-) = the Illumined (title given to Al-Medinah) iii. 58.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Al-) = the enlightened, v. 43.</li>
				<li class="c029">Munír = “The brilliant,” the enlightened, ii. 100.</li>
				<li class="c029">Munkati’ah = <em>lit.</em> “cut off” (from the weal of the world) <em>tr.</em> “defenceless,” i. 337.</li>
				<li class="c029">Munkar and Nakír, the Interrogating Angels, i. 294.</li>
				<li class="c029">Munnaskif (for manáshif) al fillfillee; according to Scott “compound of peppers” “red, white and black;” according to Lane and <em>tr.</em> here drying towels of Líf or palm-fibre, iv. 56.</li>
				<li class="c029">Murafraf (passive) from Rafraf = anything overhanging something else (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 338.</li>
				<li class="c029">Murakhkhim = a marble cutter = simply a stone-mason, vi. 60.</li>
				<li class="c029">Muruwwah <em>lit.</em> = manliness, i. 303.</li>
				<li class="c029">Músà (Moses), vi. 112.</li>
				<li class="c029">Músà wa Múzi = Músà the Malignant (Múzí = vexatious, troublesome) v. 321.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Dr. Steingass reads Muusí, the malignant, the malefactor) v. 321.</li>
				<li class="c029">Musáfahah = palm (of the hand) ii. 225.</li>
				<li class="c029">Musajja’ (<em>Arab.</em>) = rhymed prose or Saj’a, iv. 133.</li>
				<li class="c029">Musallà = Prayer-place, i. 313.</li>
				<li class="c029">Musawwadatayn (<em>Arab.</em>) = <em>lit.</em> two black things, rough copies, etc. (<em>tr.</em> “affright”) iii. 87.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mushayyadát, <em>tr.</em> “high-builded,” iii. 66.</li>
				<li class="c029">Musician, also a pederast, i. 209.</li>
				<li class="c029">Músiká (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>classically</em> “Musikí,” = <span xml:lang="grc">Μουσικὴ</span>, <em>Pers.</em> Músikár = Music, iii. 137.</li>
				<li class="c029">Muslimína, the inflect. plur. of “Muslim” = a True Believer, v. 367.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mustafà = the chosen Prophet, Mohammed, v. 203.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— bin Ism’aíl (began life as apprentice to a barber and rose to high dignity) v. 110.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mustanda = strong box, ii. 9.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mustapha, iii. 53.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mustaráh (Al-) = Chapel of Ease (a favourite haunting-place of the Jinn), ii. 85.</li>
				<li class="c029">Musulmán (our “Mussalman,” too often made <em>pl.</em> by “Mussalmen”) is corrupted Arab. used in Persia, Turkey, etc., v. 367.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mutahattil (Al-) usually = one who forsakes the world (<em>tr.</em> “oyster”) i. 215.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mutahaddisín = novi homines, upstarts (<em>tr.</em> “of the number of the new”) ii. 82.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mutalammis (“Jarír bin ’Abd al-Masíh”) a poet of “The Ignorance,” vi. 94.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Mutalaththimín” = races in North Africa whose males wear the face-swathe (“Lithám”) of cloth, v. 139.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Mutasa’lik” for “Moutasa’lik = like a Sa’lúk” = lean of limb, vi. 122.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mutátí bi zahri-h (<em>Arab.</em>) = “hanging an arse,” v. 459.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mutawallí = Prefect (of Police) ii. 30.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mutawassí ... al-Wisáyat al-támmah (Wisáyat is corr. noun) = he charged himself with her complete charge, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, maintenance (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 474.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mu’tazid bi ’llah Al-, Caliph, vi. 124.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mut’ah = temporary and extempore marriage, the Pers. Sí’ghah, iii. 33.</li>
				<li class="c029">Muwaswas (Al-) = Melancholist, i. 264.</li>
				<li class="c029">Muzawwaj = married, vi. 170.</li>
				<li class="c029">Muzfir (Al-) = the Twister, ii. 95.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mysteries of Marriage-night but lightly touched on, because the bride had lost her virginity, v. 417.</li>
				<li class="c005">Naakhaz bi-lissati-him (in text), <em>tr.</em> “until I catch them in their robbery” (see under “Luss”) v. 337.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Dr. Steingass reads “Balsatahum” = until I have received their “ransom”) v. 337.</li>
				<li class="c029">Na’sh = a box like our coffin, but open at the top, iv. 289.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nabbút (Egyptian and Syrian weapon), iii. 482.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = a quarter-staff, opp. to the “Dabbús” or club-stick of the Badawin, etc., v. 250.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nabít, son of “Ashur,” vi. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nabíz = date-wine (or grape-wine) i. 160.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nabk = lote tree or <em>Zizyphus lotus</em>, for sprinkling corpses, iv. 257.</li>
				<li class="c029">Náblús = Samaria, iii. 271.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nádán (<em>Arab.</em>) = the “unknowing” (as opp. to Naudán, the equiv. of Pers. “New of knowledge”) vi. 11.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nadan (in Assyrian story) = Nathan Kin of the people of Pukudu, vi. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">——, The Fool, vi. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nádán (<em>Pers.</em>) = fool, vi. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nadb = brandishing or throwing the javelin, iii. 154.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nadd, a compound perfume, ii. 108.</li>
				<li class="c029">Naddábah = public wailing-woman, vi. 17.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nafas <em>lit.</em> = breath (<em>tr.</em> “air”) i. 124.</li>
				<li class="c029">Náfishah = <em>Pers.</em> “Náfah” der. from the ✓ “naf” = belly or navel (the part in the musk-deer supposed to store the perfume) v. 207.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nagus = a pear, vi. 160.</li>
				<li class="c029">Naharaym (<em>Heb.</em>) = Mesopotamia, iii. 269.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nahawand, “Nahávand” the site in Al-Irak where the Persians sustained their final defeat at the hands of the Arabs (<abbr epub:type="se:era">AH</abbr> 21) v. 209.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— also one of many musical measures (like the Ispaháni, the Rásti, etc.) v. 209.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nahnu = we (for I) ii. 28.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Nahs” = something more than ill-omened, something nasty, foul, uncanny, vi. 71.</li>
				<li class="c029">Náhú (from ✓ “Nauh”) = making ceremonious “Keening” for the dead, vi. 17.</li>
				<li class="c029">Náihah = the præfica or myriologist, ii. 171.</li>
				<li class="c029">Na’ím = “the Delight” (also a P. N. of one of the Heavens) v. 199.</li>
				<li class="c029">Náim (Al-) wa al-Yakzán = The Sleeper and the Waker, i. 1.</li>
				<li class="c029">Na’íman = may it be pleasurable to thee (said by barber after operation) v. 106.</li>
				<li class="c029">Najmat al-Sabáh = constellation of Morn, vi. 173.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nákah = She-dromedary, i. 315.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nakáír al- (<em>pl.</em> of Nakír = a dinghy, a dug-out) <em>tr.</em> “canoes,” vi. 258.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Naked intercessor” (one who cannot be withstood) ii. 83.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nakdí = the actual dowry as opposed to the contingent dowry, vi. 43.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nakhing = making the camels kneel, iii. 314.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nakkál, or coffee-house tale-teller, iv. 235.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nakl (<em>Arab.</em>) = copying, describing, transcribing, iv. 193.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Nakshat” and “Sifrat,” <em>tr.</em> Coin and Gold, iii. 29.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nákús, or the Gong = Bell, vi. 100.</li>
				<li class="c029">Name, not appearing in unedited tales, till much after the proper time for specifying it, iv. 299.</li>
				<li class="c029">Names for clouds, rain, etc., in <em>Arab.</em> well nigh innumerable, vi. 241.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Na’mil ma’allazí, etc., makídah,” idiom “I will do him brown,” iv. 282.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nard = table, iii. 180.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nardashír (Nard Ardashír?) iii. 180.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nás malmúmín = assembled men, a crowd of people (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 253.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nasím = the Zephyr, or the cool north breeze of Upper Arabia, v. 197.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nasrín = moss-rose, ii. 115.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nassafa = libavit, delibavit, etc. (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 11.</li>
				<li class="c029">Natar (watching) for “Nataf” (indigestion, disgust) v. 63.</li>
				<li class="c029">Natawású sawíyah = Solace ourselves with converse, v. 395.</li>
				<li class="c029">Natawású sawíyah (cler. error for “Natawánású Shuwayyah” = “let us divert ourselves a little”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 395.</li>
				<li class="c029">Na’tázu (<em>Arab.</em>) viii. form of ’áza = it escaped, lacked, &amp;c.; hence this form “we need” <em>tr.</em> “we require” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 290.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nátúr (<em>Arab.</em>) pro. a watchman (<em>tr.</em> “old man”) iv. 204.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Al- = the Keeper, esp. of a vineyard, vi. 57.</li>
				<li class="c029">Naubah, <em>lit.</em> = a period, keeping guard (here a band of pipes and drums playing at certain periods) v. 299.</li>
				<li class="c029">Naudán (<em>Arab.</em>) equiv. to the <em>Pers.</em> “New of knowledge” as opp. to “Nádán” the “unknowing,” vi. 11.</li>
				<li class="c029">Navel string, treatment of, v. 411.</li>
				<li class="c029">Náwús = Tower of Silence, i. 264.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nawwáb (<em>pl.</em> of Náib) = a Nabob (<em>tr. lit.</em> “deputies”) ii. 8.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nayízáti (<em>Arab.</em> afterwards “Nuwayzátí” and lastly “Rayhání”) = a man who vends sweet and savoury herbs (<em>tr.</em> “Herbalist”), v. 298.</li>
				<li class="c029">Naynawah, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “Fish-town” or “town of Nin” = Ninus the founder, vi. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— in mod. days the name of a port on east bank of Tigris, vi. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— or “town of Nin” = Ninus, the founder, vi. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">Naysán, the Syro-solar month = April, vi. 27.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nazaránah <em>prop.</em> = the gift (or gifts offered by Moslem noble to his feudal superior) iii. 486.</li>
				<li class="c029">Názilah = descent (of calamity), ii. 176.</li>
				<li class="c029">Názir al-Mawáris = “Inspector of Inheritances,” ii. 286.</li>
				<li class="c029">Náz o andáz (<em>Pers.</em>) = coquetry in a half-honest sense (<em>tr.</em> “amorous liveliness”), iii. 285.</li>
				<li class="c029">Názúk, prob. a corr. of <em>Pers.</em> “Názuk” = adj. = delicate, nice, vi. 67.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nazúr = one who looks intently, for Názir, a looker, vi. 18.</li>
				<li class="c029">Necklace-pearls are the cup-bearer’s teeth, ii. 253.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Necks” per synecdochen for heads, i. 47.</li>
				<li class="c029">Negative emphatic in Arabic, i. 206.</li>
				<li class="c029">Negemet-il-Souper (Heron) = Najmat al-Sabah = constellation of morn, vi. 173.</li>
				<li class="c029">Negroids dreaded by Hindús, iii. 276.</li>
				<li class="c029">Never may neighbour defy thee, etc. (May thy dwelling-place never fall into ruin), i. 15.</li>
				<li class="c029">“New lamps for old” as in “Alaeddin,” iv. 322.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ni’am = Yes (an exception to the Abbé Sicard’s rule), ii. 19.</li>
				<li class="c029">Night beset his back = darkened behind him, ii. 197.</li>
				<li class="c029">Niká (or sand hill) = the swell of the throat, ii. 252.</li>
				<li class="c029">Níl (=the high Nile), iv. 215.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ním = Persian Lilac (Melia Azadirachta) used as preventative to poison, i. 64.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nimak-harám, <em>tr.</em> “a traitor to the salt,” iii. 286.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ním-chihreh (<em>Pers.</em>) = Half-man (<em>Arab.</em> “Shikk”), iv. 76.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nímshah = half sword or dagger, i. 14.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nisf ra’as sukkar Misri, <em>tr.</em> “half a loaf of Egyptian sugar,” v. 352.</li>
				<li class="c029">Níshábúr (Arab form of Nayshápúr = reeds of (King) Shápur), i. 270.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nisrín, an island, prob. fabulous, where amber abounds, vi. 12.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Niyat” (or intention) not pure, cause of King’s failure, v. 111.</li>
				<li class="c029">Niyyah (<em>Arab.</em>) = intent (normal pun upon the name), iv. 339.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nizál = dismounting to fight on foot, vi. 231.</li>
				<li class="c029">“None misses a slice from a cut loaf,” v. 393.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nose (large in a woman indicating a masculine nature), i. 345.</li>
				<li class="c029">“No thing poketh and stroketh more strenuously than the Gird,” or hideous Abyssinian Cynocephalus,—popular Eastern belief, iv. 333.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nukl-i-Pishkil = goat-dung bonbons, i. 288.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nún al-taakid = the N. of injunction, ii. 23.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nur al-Nihár = Light of the Day, iii. 419.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nur Jehán (<em>Pers.</em>) = “Light of the World,” iii. 473.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nusf = half a dirham, drachma or franc, iv. 19–37.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nusfs = Halves (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, of dirhams), i. 300.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (180 in these days = about 10d.), iv. 98.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nu’umán (Al-), King of the Arab kingdom of Hirah, i. 170.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nuwab (broken plur. of “Naubah,”) the Anglo-Indian Nowbut (<em>tr.</em> “Drums”), i. 324.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nuwájiru ’l-wukúfát = Settlement of bequeathal, v. 467.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Steingass reads “nuwájiru”) (for “nuájiru”) ’l-wakúfát and translates “letting for hire such parts of my property as were inalienable” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), v. 467.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nuzhat al-Fuád = “Delight of the Vitals” (or heart), i. 25.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Zaman = “Delight of the age,” v. 180.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nuzhat-í = pleasance, ii. 45.</li>
				<li class="c005">“O man, O miserablest of men, O thou disappointed,” etc., characteristic words of abuse, v. 359.</li>
				<li class="c029">O my son! O my Child! (repetition a sign of kindness and friendliness) iv. 269.</li>
				<li class="c029">O my uncle (to elder man): O my cousin! (to youth) iv. 119.</li>
				<li class="c029">O rider of the jar, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, a witch, vi. 76.</li>
				<li class="c029">O thousand-horned (thousandfold cuckold) i. 247.</li>
				<li class="c029">O vile of birth (Asl) a man’s origin being held to influence his conduct throughout life, i. 62.</li>
				<li class="c029">“O Woman,” popular form of address, iii. 108.</li>
				<li class="c029">“O worshipper of Allah,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “O Moslem, opposed to enemy of Allah” = a non-Moslem, v. 460.</li>
				<li class="c029">Oarsman stands to his work in the East, iii. 25.</li>
				<li class="c029">Oath of triple divorce irrevocable, i. 246.</li>
				<li class="c029">Obedience to children common in Eastern folk-lore, vi. 90.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ober-Ammergau “Miracle play,” i. 250.</li>
				<li class="c029">Objects (better kept hidden) seen with naked eye by telescope (vulgar belief) iii. 438.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ocular testimony demanded by Moslem law, ii. 17.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Of which a description will follow in its place,” a regular formula of the Ráwí, or professional reciter, v. 131.</li>
				<li class="c029">Og bin ’Unk (=Og of the Neck), the fabled King of Bashan, iii. 19.</li>
				<li class="c029">Oil, anointing with for incipient consumption, ii. 75.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Old lamps for new lamps—who will exchange?” iii. 159.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Omán, name of the capital of Eastern Arabia, vi. 139.</li>
				<li class="c029">Omar ’Adi bin Artah, i. 39.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— bin Abd al-Aziz = the good Caliph, i. 39.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— ibn Abi Rabí’ah, the Korashí (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> of the Koraysh tribe) i. 41.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ommiades, Cathedral Mosque of, one of the wonders of the Moslem world, vi. 172.</li>
				<li class="c029">Onager, the Gúr-i-Khár of Persia, iii. 282.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (wild ass) confounded with Zebra, iii. 282.</li>
				<li class="c029">“One day of the days,” a phrase emphasising the assertion that it was a chance day, iv. 75.</li>
				<li class="c029">Only son has a voice in the disposal of his sister, vi. 83.</li>
				<li class="c029">“On my shop” = bit of boarding where the master sits, or on a stool in the street, ii. 281.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Open the spittle” = to break the fast, v. 51.</li>
				<li class="c029">Original sin, vi. 247.</li>
				<li class="c029">Orisons = the prayers of the last day and night, ii. 94.</li>
				<li class="c029">Osarsiph = Osiris-Sapi (Moses) vi. 112.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Otbah hath a colic,” vi. 77.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings, &amp;c.,” an idea not less Moslem than Christian, iv. 271.</li>
				<li class="c005">Pá-andáz = carpets and costly cloths, (spread between Baghdad and Meccah for Harun al-Rashid) iii. 177.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = cloth to tread upon, vi. 259.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (<em>Pers.</em>) = a carpet made of costly stuffs—a perquisite of royal attendants, iii. 141.</li>
				<li class="c029">Padding introduced to fill up the “night,” v. 460.</li>
				<li class="c029">Paggí = Tracker, iv. 8.</li>
				<li class="c029">Palace between two rivers = the Nílotic Rauzah-island, ii. 281.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— not the place for a religious and scrupulous woman, ii. 229.</li>
				<li class="c029">Papal bulls and Kings’ letters (in Mediæval Europe) were placed for respect on the head, iii. 89.</li>
				<li class="c029">Parasang (<em>Gr.</em> <span xml:lang="grc">παράσάγγης</span>), iii. 456.</li>
				<li class="c029">Parks on the Coasts of Tropical Seas, i. 320.</li>
				<li class="c029">Part and parts = more or less thoroughly, ii. 152.</li>
				<li class="c029">Parturition and death compared with both processes in the temperates of Europe, ii. 23.</li>
				<li class="c029">Parwez, older pronunciation of the mod. (Khusrau) “Parvíz,” iii. 502.</li>
				<li class="c029">Pashkhánah = a mosquito-curtain, iii. 121.</li>
				<li class="c029">Pay-day for boys in Egypt (Thursday) iv. 98.</li>
				<li class="c029">Payne quoted, i. 1, 8, 11, 34, 56, 134, 165, 209, 222, 238, 278, 286, 288, 289, 306, 311, 312, 322, 327, 338, 344; ii. 28, 54, 67, 73, 85, 110, 112, 154, 191, <i><span xml:lang="la">ib.</span></i>, 200, 227, 231, 238, 251, 263, 267, 275, 281; iv. 332; v. 55, 69.</li>
				<li class="c029">Paysá (pice) = two farthings and in weight = ½ an oz., iii. 352.</li>
				<li class="c029">Pear-tree, not found in Badawi land, v. 117.</li>
				<li class="c029">Penalty inflicted to ensure obedience, iii. 336.</li>
				<li class="c029">Pennyroyal (here mere “shot”; the orig. has “Baítharán”) v. 458.</li>
				<li class="c029">Perceval C. de, quoted, vi. 89.</li>
				<li class="c029">Peri-Banu (The Fairy) iii. 419.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Parí) in its modern form has a superficial resemblance to “Fairy,” iii. 419.</li>
				<li class="c029">Peris, iii. 419.</li>
				<li class="c029">Perízádah = Fairy-born, iii. 502.</li>
				<li class="c029">Perjury easily expiated amongst Moslems, ii. 38.</li>
				<li class="c029">Perspired in her petticoat trowsers (a physical sign of delight in beauty, usually attributed to old women) v. 142.</li>
				<li class="c029">Pertinence (in couplets) not a <i><span xml:lang="la">sine quâ non</span></i> amongst Arabs, v. 135.</li>
				<li class="c029">Phantasms from the Divine presence of ‘Ali ’Aziz Efendi, the Cretan, iii. 41.</li>
				<li class="c029">Pharaoh (of Hebrew Scriptures) has become with the Arabs “Fir’aun,” the dynastic name of Egyptian kings, vi. 12.</li>
				<li class="c029">Pharos of Alexandria, one of the four Wonders of the Moslem world, iv. 36.</li>
				<li class="c029">Philomelet, The shrilling, iv. 245.</li>
				<li class="c029">Physiognomist, a favourite character in Arabic folk-lore, iv. 107.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Physiognomy (‘Firásah’) unless there be the science of, other science availeth not,” iv. 10.</li>
				<li class="c029">Piastre (Egyptian) = one-fifth of a shilling, iv. 72.</li>
				<li class="c029">Pictures of faces whose eyes seem to follow beholders, iii. 427.</li>
				<li class="c029">Pigeon blood, used to resemble the results of a bursten hymen, v. 29.</li>
				<li class="c029">Pilaff (Turco-English form of Persian Puláo) iii. 326.</li>
				<li class="c029">Pilgrimage quoted, i. 285, 337, 228, 207, 205, 42, 165, 194; ii. 20, 71, 281, 54, 152, 9, 63, 220, <i><span xml:lang="la">ib.</span></i>, 222, 59, 22, 51; iii. 314, 330, 405, 406; iv. 35, 38, 153, 196, 208, 343; v. 43, 180, 214; vi. 9, 83, 99, 104, 105, 131, 174.</li>
				<li class="c029">Pilgrims settle in the two Holy Places, iii. 406.</li>
				<li class="c029">Pír = saint, spiritual guide, iii. 8.</li>
				<li class="c029">Pírozah = turquoise (<em>Arab. form</em> Fíruzah) iii. 270.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Písh-namáz” (<em>Pers.</em>) = fore-prayer, iii. 380.</li>
				<li class="c029">Pit = grave, i. 88.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Plied him with wine,” a favourite habit with mediæval Arabs, ii. 50.</li>
				<li class="c029">Poetry (Persian) often alludes to the rose, etc., ii. 99.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Pointing the moral,” iii. 265.</li>
				<li class="c029">Police (Eastern) ii. 6.</li>
				<li class="c029">Porphyry quarries in Middle Egypt, rediscovery of, vi. 60.</li>
				<li class="c029">Practical joking, a dangerous form of fun, as much affected by Egyptians as Hibernians, v. 455.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Prayer of Moses, the man of God,” vi. 103.</li>
				<li class="c029">Prayers at burial, beginning with four “Takbírs,” i. 290.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— for the dead recited over bier, iii. 380.</li>
				<li class="c029">——, whilst at, the Moslem cannot be spoken to, i. 197.</li>
				<li class="c029">Precious stones, Arab superstitions concerning, v. 130.</li>
				<li class="c029">Precocious children, iii. 416.</li>
				<li class="c029">Pretext for murdering an enemy to his faith (Jewish) an idea prevalent in Eastern world utterly wrong, v. 214.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Pretty Fanny’s ways” amongst Moslems, v. 85.</li>
				<li class="c029">Priah = tearing the foreskin (second operation of circumcision) v. 217.</li>
				<li class="c029">Primitive attire of Easterns in hot climate, iii. 20.</li>
				<li class="c029">Prince, petty Indian, preceded in state processions by led horses whose saddles are studded with diamonds, iii. 134.</li>
				<li class="c029">Prison had seven doors (to indicate its formidable strength) v. 233.</li>
				<li class="c029">Prisoners expected to feed themselves in Moslem lands, v. 338.</li>
				<li class="c029">Professional dancer, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, a public prostitute, iv. 29.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— singers, become freed women, turned out “respectable,” ii. 254.</li>
				<li class="c029">Prothesis without apodosis, figure, iv. 29.</li>
				<li class="c029">Public gaol = here the Head Policeman’s house. In mod. times it is part of the wall in Governor’s palace, v. 337.</li>
				<li class="c029">Pummel of the saddle, ii. 85.</li>
				<li class="c029">Punishment by flogging, vi. 9.</li>
				<li class="c029">Purse = Kis = 500 piastres = £5, iv. 74.</li>
				<li class="c029">Purses, one thousand compose the Treasury (“Khaznah”) = £5,000, iv. 74.</li>
				<li class="c029">Puzzling questions and clever replies, a favourite exercise in the East, vi. 97.</li>
				<li class="c005">Quarters, containing rooms in which girls are sold, ii. 71.</li>
				<li class="c029">Queen Shu’á’ah = Queen Sunbeam, ii. 107.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Quench that fire for him” (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> hush up the matter) ii. 15.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Quicker to slay than Amrú bin Kulsum” (Proverb) vi. 94.</li>
				<li class="c005">Raas Ghanam = a head of sheep (form of expressing singularity common to Arabic) ii. 207.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Sukkar = Loaf sugar, v. 352.</li>
				<li class="c029">Raba’ = <em>lit.</em> spring quarters (<em>tr.</em> “a lodging house”) ii. 19.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rabí’a vi. 245.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rabite (steed of purest) = an Arab of noble strain, iii. 287.</li>
				<li class="c029">Radáh (a form of “Rádih”) = “the large hipped,” v. 198.</li>
				<li class="c029">Radíf or back-rider, common in Arabia, v. 162.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rádih, a P.N. (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 161.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Rafá al-Bashkhánah” = he raised a hanging, a curtain (<em>tr.</em> “the arras”) iii. 121.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rafaka (and “Zafaka”) = took their pleasure, v. 282.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rábíb = monk or lion (<em>tr.</em> “God-fearing”) vi. 155.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rahíl = Rachel, iii. 355.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ráhilah = a riding camel, i. 315.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Rahúm” for “Rahím” (Doric form) = compassionate, vi. 18.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rahwán (cor. of Rahbán) = one who keeps the (right) way, i. 191.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Rá’ih fayn” = wending (art thou) whither? iv. 207.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ráih yasír (<em>Arab.</em>) = about to become (peasant’s language) iii. 131.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rain and bounty are synonymous, i. 43.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ra’ís (<em>fem.</em> Ra’ísah) the captain, the skipper (not the owner) iv. 125., v. 22.</li>
				<li class="c029">Raisins, an efficacious “pick-me-up,” v. 51.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rajah of Baroda, iii. 134.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rajul ikhtiyár, <em>tr.</em> “a man of a certain age” (polite term for old man) v. 402.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Ja’ídí = Larrikin, iv 280.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Khuzari (<em>Arab.</em>) = a green-meat man (<em>tr.</em> “costermonger”) v. 291.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Khwájá = Gentleman, v. 254.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Rákiba-há”; the technical term for demoniac possession, v. 326.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ram’s mutton preferred in wilder tribes of the East, because it gives the teeth more to do, v. 299.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ramaha bi-h = bolted with him, v. 382.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rankah or “Ranakah” prob. for “Raunakah,” which usually means “troubled” (speaking of water) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 66.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rape, i. 311.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rasátík (<em>pl.</em> of Rusták) = villages, i. 256.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rashákah Al- (<em>Arab.</em>) a word not found in common lexicons, said to be a fork with three prongs, here probably a hat stand (<em>tr.</em> “peg”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 244.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rasílah = a (she) partner (<em>tr.</em> “accompanyist”) ii. 44.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rasmál (vulg. Syrian and Egyptian form of Raas al-mál = stock in trade) = capital in hand, i. 248.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ratl (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>pron.</em> by Europeans “Rotl” (Rotolo) = a pound, iii. 128; iv. 295.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Rauzah” in Algiers was a royal park, vi. 243.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Rauz al-Sanájirah” = plain of the Sinjars, vi. 243.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ráwi = a professional tale-teller (<em>tr.</em> “Seer”) i. 56.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rayhánah, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> the “Basil,” mostly a servile name, ii. 20.</li>
				<li class="c029">Razah = cedar or fir (old controversy) vi. 5.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rází (Al-) = a native of Rayy City, i. 288.</li>
				<li class="c029">Reading of “meat and drink” enjoyed by Arabs as much as by Englishmen, iv. 160.</li>
				<li class="c029">Reading placed in more honourable place than writing (“Writing and reading,” as opposed to “Reading and writing”) vi. 5.</li>
				<li class="c029">Red camel (Ahmar) ii. 248.</li>
				<li class="c029">Red robes a sign of displeasure, iv. 297.</li>
				<li class="c029">Red Sea (Holy Writ does not say that Pharaoh was drowned in) vi. 99.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rent his robes (usually a sign of quiet, here a mark of strong excitement) v. 71.</li>
				<li class="c029">Retribution confined to this life, and belief that Fate is fruit of man’s actions (Mosaic theory) vi. 140.</li>
				<li class="c029">Re-union after severance—modesty in Alaeddin as contrasted with Kamar al-Zamán, etc., iii. 176.</li>
				<li class="c029">Revetment of old wells in Arabia, mostly of dry masonry, v. 132.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rheumatism, a common complaint in even the hottest climates, v. 160.</li>
				<li class="c029">Riddle or conundrum, vi. 97.</li>
				<li class="c029">Riding men as asses, a facetious exaggeration of an African practice, vi. 240.</li>
				<li class="c029">Right hand (seated at the) a place of honour in Europe; amongst Moslems the place would be to the left, iii. 136.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ríh = Wind, gust (of temper), pride, rage, v. 58.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rikáb (<em>Arab.</em>) = Stirrup + “dár” (<em>Pers.</em>) = holder (<em>tr.</em> “groom”) iv. 24.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rikkí al-Saut = soften the sound (or “lower thy voice,”) ii. 89.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Ring and the Lamp” have a magical effect over physique and morale of the owner, iii. 104.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ring given as token to show fair play, i. 248.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rísah (copyist’s error for “Rishah”) = a thread, feather, line, iv. 259.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Rise that I may seat myself in thy stead” (addressed to the full moon)—true Orientalism, iii. 151.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ríshah = feather, plume, (usual meaning) Dr. Steingass explains, iv. 259.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rising up and sitting down, usual sign of emotion, i. 348.</li>
				<li class="c029">Riyál (from, the <em>Span.</em> “Real”) = royal (coin) <em>tr.</em> “real”, iv. 284.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Rizk” equiv. for “Al-Rizku ’l-hasanu” = any good thing obtained without exertion (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 245.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— maksúm (Al-), an old and sage byword pregnant with significance, iv. 245.</li>
				<li class="c029">Roc or vulture, vi. 23.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rod of Moses became a common symbol of dignity, etc., vi. 157.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rods of Moses and Aaron, vi. 98, 99.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rodwell quoted, v. 42, 48.</li>
				<li class="c029">Roger, old name of the parish bull in rural England, iv. 203.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Rose up and sat down,” a sign of agitation, v. 328.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rosso antico (mostly a porphyry) iii. 139.</li>
				<li class="c029">Roum = Greeks, i. 134.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— city of (Rúmí) vi. 89.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Rub’a” (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>pl.</em> Arbá = the fourth of a “Waybah” (<em>tr.</em> “half a quartern”) iv. 128.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Rudaynían,” from “Rudaynah,” either a woman or a place, vi. 230.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rúh Allah <em>lit.</em> = breath of Allah (<em>tr.</em> “Spirit of Allah”) i. 251.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rúhi = <em>lit.</em> my breath (<em>tr.</em> “my sprite”) ii. 120.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rukh = Roc, iii. 186.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (the mythical—mixed up with the mysterious bird Símurgh) iii. 188.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rukhám = marble or alabaster, here used for building material, vi. 60.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rumh = lance, i. 90.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rúmí (“Roum”) in Marocco and other parts of Moslem world is still syn. with our “European,” vi. 89.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rusáfiyah = a cap, i. 160.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Rushdu ’llah” or “Al-Hudà,” spiritual direction or divine grace received from Allah, vi. 104.</li>
				<li class="c029">Russians (Asiatics have a very contemptible opinion of the) v. 119.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rustáki, from Rusták, a quarter of Baghdad, ii. 209.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rutab wa manázil = degrees and dignities, i. 217.</li>
				<li class="c005">Sá’ah = the German <i><span xml:lang="de">Stunde</span></i>, our old “Stound” (meaning to Moslems the spaces between prayer-times) v. 151.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Sa’alab” or “Tha’lab” = Fox, vi. 146.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sabba raml = cast in sand (may be clerical error for “Zaraba raml” = he struck sand, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, made geomantic figures), <em>here tr.</em> “striking a geomantic table,” iii. 68.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Sabbal’alayhim (for ’alayhinna, the usual masc. <em>pro fem.</em>) Al-Sattár” (<em>Arab.</em>) = <em>lit.</em> “the Veiler let down a curtain upon them,” v. 276.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sabbath (the) = the Saturday, iii. 64.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sabt = Sabbath, Saturday, v. 228, 324.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sa’d = prosperity, iii. 341.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sádah (Al-) wa al-Khatáyát <em>tr.</em> “various colors both plain and striped,” v. 223.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Sádát wa Ashráf” = Sayyids and Sharífs, vi. 233.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sa’dí = prosperous, iii. 341.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sàdir (Al-) w al-Ghádí = those who went forth betime (the latter may mean those who came for the morning meal) iii. 27.</li>
				<li class="c029">Saff Kamaríyát min al-Zujáj = glazed and coloured lunettes, ii. 39.</li>
				<li class="c029">Safíh = slab over the grave (<em>tr.</em> “pave”) i. 41.</li>
				<li class="c029">Safúl (Al-) = ranks of fighting men, or rows of threads on a loom, i. 48.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sáhah = courtyard (as opposed to “Bathah” = inner court), i. 284.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sáhal for Sahal (broad “Doric” of Syria) iii. 125.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sahará <em>pron.</em> Sahrá, i. 251.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sahbá = red wine, ii. 99.</li>
				<li class="c029">(“Sahha) ’alakah (=a something) fí hazá ’l-Amri” = albeit I will take no part, vi. 245.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sáhib = owner (same as “Dallál” = broker) iv. 224.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— al-Hayát” = astronomer (may also = a physiognomist) v. 289.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— al-jayyid” (Al-) (<em>Arab.</em>) = excellent companion, vi. 5.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sáhibi-h = his mate (masculine) iv. 346.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sáhils, or shorelands, ii. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sahl <em>meaning</em> “the easy tempered” (Scott writes “Sohul”) v. 138.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sahrá (<em>Arab.</em>) = desert (applied by Persians to waste grounds about a town: <em>hereto</em> “barren hill-country”) iii. 67.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sahríj = Cistern, v. 5.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sails hoisted and canvas loosed (anchors weighed and canvas spread) i. 321.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sajálmah-bird, unknown to dictionaries, prob. species of hawk, vi. 35.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Sakalat” (<em>Pers.</em>) or “Saklatún,” whence Mr. Skeat would derive “scarlet,” vi. 5.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sakf (flat roof), must have a parapet (a Jewish precaution neglected by Al-Islam) v. 219.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sakhrah = labour, i. 84.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sakhtúr (<em>Arab.</em>) for “Shakhtúr” <em>tr.</em> “batel,” v. 163.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sákiyah = water-wheel, ii. 47.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sakk (<em>pl.</em> “Sikák” and “Sukúk”) = “nail” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 380.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sakká (<em>Arab.</em>) = a water carrier, vi. 46.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— Sharbah,” who supplies water to passengers in streets, vi. 46.</li>
				<li class="c029">Salaku-hu wa nashalú-hu = “they scored it,” v. 395.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Salám” here = Heaven’s blessing, vi. 97.</li>
				<li class="c029">Salám pronounced after prayers, i. 14.</li>
				<li class="c029">Salásín = thirty (a clerical error for “three”) iv. 310.</li>
				<li class="c029">Salát, sundry technical meanings, vi. 103.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = the formal ceremonious prayer, vi. 103.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Salb” = impalement, everywhere else meaning crucifixion, vi. 206–1.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Sálihín” (<em>Arab.</em>) = the Saints, the Holy ones (<em>tr.</em> “the Hallows”) iv. 218.</li>
				<li class="c029">Salkh (<em>Arab.</em>) = flaying (meaning also a peculiar form of circumcision) v. 214.</li>
				<li class="c029">Salt rubbed on wounds to staunch the blood, v. 97.</li>
				<li class="c029">Samár (<em>Arab.</em>) from <em>Pers.</em> “Sumar” = a reed, a rush, v. 226.</li>
				<li class="c029">Samaria (according to Moslems, Shamrín and Shamrún) iii. 271.</li>
				<li class="c029">Samaritans, vi. 160–1.</li>
				<li class="c029">Samáwah, confounded with Kerbela—a desert with a place of pilgrimage, iii. 484.</li>
				<li class="c029">——, Desert of, iii. 484.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Town on Euphrates) iii. 484.</li>
				<li class="c029">Samd = carpets and pots and pans (<em>tr. Vaiselle</em>) vi. 64.</li>
				<li class="c029">Samhari, vi. 229.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sámiri Al-, Golden Calf of, vi. 160.</li>
				<li class="c029">——, translated by Christian commentators as “Samaritan,” vi. 160.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sammán = quail, v. 151.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Samman” (for “Sammán”) = quails, vi. 66.</li>
				<li class="c029">“——” or “Summán” (classically “Salwá”) = quails, vi. 147.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sammár = reciters, ii. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">Samm Sá’ah (in text), <em>tr.</em> “poison of the hour,” v. 352.</li>
				<li class="c029">Samson’s enigma (Judges xiv. 12), vi. 106.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sandarúsah (<em>Arab.</em>) = red juniper gum (from <em>Pers.</em> “Sandar” = amber) <em>tr.</em> “Sandarach,” vi. 141.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sanják (in modern parlance) = minor</li>
				<li class="c029">province, iv. 245.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (<em>Turk.</em>) = flag, banner, iv. 245.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— -dar = the banner-bearer, ensign, iv. 245.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sankharíb the Sovran, vi. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">Santír = psalteries, ii. 246.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sapídaj (corresponding with “Isfidaj”), <em>tr.</em> “ceruse” or white lead, v. 130.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sára’a hu wa láwa’a-hu = he rushed upon him and worried him (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 266.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sára la-hu Shanán, <em>tr.</em> “In his new degree he was feared,” v. 472.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Steingass reads “Thániyan” = and he became second to him (the Sultan), <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, his alter ego) v. 472.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sar’a’l-Lijám, <em>tr.</em> “bridal thongs,” v. 385.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Sárayah” (for “Saráyah,” Serai, Government House), <em>tr.</em> “Palace,” v. 6.</li>
				<li class="c029">Saráy not to be confounded with Serraglio = Harem, iv. 234.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (<em>Pers.</em>) official head-quarters of the Walí, iv. 234.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sára yuráshí-h, <em>tr.</em> “kindness and liberality,” v. 473.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (“Yuráshí” and “Yuráshú” are the 6th form of “rashá, yarshú”) = he bestowed a gift (principally for the sake of bribery), he treated kindly (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 473.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sardáb = a souterrain, v. 117.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sarhádún = “Sarkhadom” (<em>Gauttier</em>). The great usurper Sargon, vi. 6.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sarír = a bier without the corpse, iv. 289.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Sarkhah adwat la-há al-Saráyah” = a cry to which the Palace women raised an echo (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 272.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sarmújah (<em>Arab.</em>) = sandals, slippers, etc., v. 442; <ul><li>from <em>Pers.</em> “Sarmúzah,” a kind of hose or gaiter worn over a boot (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 217.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c029">Sarráf = a money changer (<em>tr.</em> “shroff”) iii. 333.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Sarra Surrah (Surratan) = he tied up a purse (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 412.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sarsarah (cler. error for “Akhaza (?) surratan”) = he took a purse, v. 462.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sárú (dakhalú, jalasú, etc.), in the plural for the dual—popular and vulgar speech, iii. 66.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sat down (in sign of agitation) ii. 211.</li>
				<li class="c029">Satíhah (<em>Arab.</em>) = a She-Satíh, iv. 69.</li>
				<li class="c029">Satl = water-can (Lat. and Etruscan Situla and Situlus, a water-pot) i. 291.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sattár (<em>Arab.</em>) = “The Veiler” iv. 31 (corresponding with “Jupiter Servator”) iv. 270.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sawábi (a regularly formed broken plural of a singular “Sábi’” = the pointing one) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 419.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sawáki = channels, ii. 93.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sayabán (<em>Pers.</em>) = canopy, iv. 129.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sayf kunúzí = a talismanic scymitar (<em>tr.</em> “magical sword”) v. 426.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sayfu (Al-) w’-al Kalanj = scymitar and dagger, v. 381.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sayyád, <em>lit.</em> = a fisherman, vi. 161.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sayyáh (Al-) = the Shrieker, iv. 245.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sayyid (descendant of Hasan) and the Sharíf (der. from Husayn) = difference between, v. 39.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Sáza, Yasízu” (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>tr.</em> “genealogist,” not a dictionary word—perhaps a clerical error for “Sāsa” = he groomed or broke in a horse, iv. 21.</li>
				<li class="c029">Scarlet (red, violet, white, green) vi. 5.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Sciences are of three kinds, etc.” iv. 10.</li>
				<li class="c029">Scott quoted, iv. 3, 7, 14, 19, 27, 35, 43, 45, 55, 56, 59, 67, 74, 80, 90, 95, 97, 109, 127, 169, 176, 189, 244, 297, 303, 307, 334, 351; v. 3, 17, 21, 22, <i><span xml:lang="la">ib.</span></i> 24, 30, 36, 39, 44, 50, 63, 65, 105, 114, 116, 119, 120, 123, 125, 138, 153, 184, 210, 213, 214, 227, 231, 253, 263, 273, 321, 335, 347, 357, 465.</li>
				<li class="c029">Seal-ring (or Signet-ring) iii. 72.</li>
				<li class="c029">Second-sight (<em>Egypt.</em> “Darb al-Mandal”) iv. 45.</li>
				<li class="c029">Secret, difficult for an Eastern to keep, i. 342.</li>
				<li class="c029">Seed pearls made into great pearls (also rubies and branch-coral) i. 197.</li>
				<li class="c029">Seeking to release Soul of Prince who had perished, iii. 298.</li>
				<li class="c029">Semi-abortions (preservation of, a curse in sixth century) iii. 498.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sentiment, morbid and unmasculine French, contrasted with the healthy and manly tone of the Nights, v. 267.</li>
				<li class="c029">Serraglio-palace; <em>der. from</em> Serai (<em>Pers.</em>) = a palace, <em>also der. from</em> Cerrar (Spanish and Portuguese) = to shut up, iii. 128.</li>
				<li class="c029">Service (yearly value of his fief), i. 256.</li>
				<li class="c029">Seven ages of woman-kind, v. 56.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— handwritings, vi. 226.</li>
				<li class="c029">Severance-spies = stars and planets, ii. 236.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sha’abán (his face gladdening as the crescent moon of) v. 142.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shabakah = net (hung over shop during absence of shopkeeper) i. 205.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shabaytar = the Shuhrúr (in MS. Suhrúr) = a blackbird, v. 151.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— also called “Samaytar” and “Abu al-Ayzar” = the father of the brisk one (a long-necked bird like heron) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 151.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Shadow of Allah,” a title of the Shah, iii. 531.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shaghaf = violent love, joy, grief, vi. 15.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shaghaftíní (also “Ashghaftíní”) from Shaghaf = violent love, joy, grief = “Thou hast enamoured me,” vi. 15.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shaghrí (<em>Pers.</em>), <i><span xml:lang="la">e.g.</span></i> “Kyafsh-i-Shaghri” = slippers of shagreen, iii. 282.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shagreen (<em>der. from Pers.</em>) “Shaghri,” produced by skin of wild ass, iii. 282.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shah Bakht = King Luck, i. 191.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shah-Goase (Shah Ghawwás = King Diver), vi. 233.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shahbán, Bresl. Edit. form of Shahryár = City-keeper, for City-friend, i. 334.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sháhbander = King of the port, a harbour master, v. 254.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sháhinsháh = King of kings, iii. 534.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— a title first assumed by Ardashír, iii. 500.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sháhmiyánah = a huge marquee or pavilion tent in India, iii. 469.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sháhrazád (in Mac. Edit. Shahrázád) i. 334.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shahrazád and Shahryar, ii. 259.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shahr-Bánu (<em>Pers.</em>) = City-queen, iii. 486.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shahrbáz (W. M. MS.) = City-player or city-falcon, iv. 6.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shahrzádah (W. M. MS.) = “City born” (for “Shahrázád”) iv. 6.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shahwah (<em>Arab.</em>) = lust, iii. 33.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shahwah dáram = I am lustful, iii. 33.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shá’il, copyist’s error for “Shághil,” act. part of Shughl = business affairs, v. 245.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Here probably for the fuller “Shughl shághil”) = an urgent business (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 245.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shajarat al-Durr = Branch of Pearl, i. 12.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Rih = Wind-tree (?) iv. 138.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shakbán = the end of cloth, gown, cloak, etc. (Houdas) vi. 189.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sháked (<em>Heb.</em>) = Almond-tree, vi. 7.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shakhat, <em>tr.</em> here “revile” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shakhs = carven image, v. 30.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— either a person or an image (<em>here tr.</em> “Image”) iii. 18.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— mafsúd = man of perverted belief (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, an infidel) i. 352.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shaking his clothes (in sign of quitting possession) ii. 205.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— out his skirts,” a sign of willingly parting with possessions, iii. 316.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shakk (<em>Arab.</em>) = splitting or quartering, v. 96.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shaklaba (here = “shakala”) = he weighed out (money), he had to do with a woman (<em>tr.</em> “tumbled”) v. 291.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shalabi = a dandy, a macaroni (from the Turk. Chelebi) v. 243.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shám = Syria (and its capital) called Damascus (Cotheal MS.) vi. 167.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sham’ádín, a would-be Arabic plural of the Persian “Sham’adán” = candlestick, chandelier, iii. 109.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shamámah (or “Chamama,” accord. to Gauttier and Heron) vi. 68.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shámat = cheek mole (beauty spot), applied to Damascus (Shám) vi. 167.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Shám ba’d az nisf-i-shab” = dinner after midnight = supper (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 244.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shame (uncovered my), in this instance “head and face,” v. 329.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shámiyánah = a royal pavilion (<em>cor.</em> of <em>Pers.</em> “Sayabán” = canopy) iv. 129.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shámiyát bi al-Nár, an Inquisitorial costume (<em>tr.</em> “a black habit bepatched with flame colour”) iv. 79.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shampooing (practice of) i. 116.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shamrín (and Shamrún) = Samaria, iii. 271.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shamúl (fem.) = liquor hung in the wind to cool, i. 42.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sharárah = a spark, ii. 87.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sharí’at, forbidding divorce by compulsion, ii. 147.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sharif (a descendant from Mohammed) i. 285.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sharífí = a sequin, ii. 143.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sharkh (<em>Arab.</em>) = in dicts. the unpolished blade of hiltless sword (<em>tr.</em> here “a butcher’s chopper”) iv. 220.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sharkíyah (province in Egypt) ii. 16.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sharr (Al-) (“the wickedness”) last city in Meckran before entering Sind, i. 336.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— fi al-Haramayn = wickedness in the two Holy Places, ii. 220.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shásh = a small compact white turband and distinctive sign of the true Believer, v. 143.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shashmah (from <em>Pers.</em> “Chashmah” = fountain) <em>tr.</em> “privies,” v. 458.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shástras—Hindu Scripture or Holy Writ, iii. 429.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shatárah (prop. cleverness), signifying vileness and rashness (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 220.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shawáhid (meaning that heart testifies to heart) <em>tr.</em> “hearts have their witnesses,” ii. 87.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shawwara binta-hu = he gave a marriage outfit to his daughter (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 28.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shaybání (Al-) = “Of the Shaybán tribe” ii. 191.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shayh = Artemisia, iv. 343.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shaykh becomes ceremonially impure by handling a corpse, i. 290.</li>
				<li class="c029">——, for humility, sits at the side of room, not at the top (“Sadr”) iv. 84.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— of Islam, v. 317.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— or head of the Guild for thieves, iv. 282.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Hujjáj = Shaykh of the Pilgrims, ii. 63.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Islám, the Chief of the Moslem Church, iv. 69.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— al-Tawaif” may mean “Shaykh of the Tribes” (of Jinns) ii. 117.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shayyan li’lláh = <em>lit.</em> (Give me some) Thing for (the love of) Allah (<em>tr.</em> “An alms, for the love of Allah”) ii. 44.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shayy bi-lásh = <em>lit.</em> “a thing gratis or in vain” (<em>here tr.</em> “matters beyond the range of matter”) iii. 68.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sházz = Voice (doubtful if girl’s, nightingale’s, or dove’s) ii. 244.</li>
				<li class="c029">“She had never gone or come” = she was in her own home, iii. 183.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— heard a blowing behind her” (a phenomenon well known to spiritualists) ii. 101.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— will double thy store of presents,” ii. 111.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sherbet and coffee, mention of, makes the tale synchronous with that of Ma’aruf or the xvii. century, iv. 55.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sherífí <em>pl.</em> of Sherífíyah (Egyptian form); here “Ashrafis,” iv. 336.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shi’ah doctrine, v. 178.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shikk (<em>Arab.</em>) = Half-man, iv. 69, 76.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ship’s crew run on shore on their own business immediately the vessel cast anchor, v. 475.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shísheh-ká paysá = a (pice) small coin of glass, iii. 351.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shīve-Zād, iii. 47.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Shobási,” for “Sobáshí,” vi. 191.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shooting shafts and firing bullets at the butt, practised by Easterns on horseback, v. 421.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shroft (Arab Sayrafi) i. 298.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shubbák = lattice (also “Mashrabiyah” = latticed balcony) i. 29.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Shúf-hu,” (<em>Arab.</em>) (colloquial form of “Shuf-hu”) = look upon him, iii. 58.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shuhbá (Al-) = Ash-coloured, verging upon white, ii. 110.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Shuhrúr al-kanísah” = the Blackbird of the Church (Christians in Syria call St. Paul, on account of his eloquence) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 151.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Shurbah” (<em>Pers.</em> Shorbah) = mess of pottage (<em>tr.</em> “dish of roast meat”) iv. 22.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shúwár (<em>Arab.</em>) = trousseau (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 28.</li>
				<li class="c029">Si’at rizki-h = the ease with which he earned his livelihood (<em>tr.</em> “fortune”) i. 282.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sibák (<em>Arab.</em>) usually = a leash (for falconry) <em>tr.</em> “silken cord,” vi. 46.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sídí mistaken for Sayyid, iii. 321.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = my lord, iii. 321.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = “my lord” here becomes part of a name, ii. 151.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Nu’uman (sometimes “Sidi Nouman,” or “Sidi Nonman”) iii. 321.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sífah (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>lit.</em> = a quality (<em>tr.</em> “property”) iv. 102.</li>
				<li class="c029">Signet-ring made of carnelian, v. 52.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— of kingship (important sign of sovereignty) v. 112.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sijn al-Dam = the Prison of Blood, ii. 161.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sikálah (<em>Sing.</em>) = scaffolding, vi. 61.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sikbáj a marinated stew like Zirbájah, vi. 160.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (<em>Pers.</em> Sikbá) called “Mother of Hospitality,” being principal dish set before guests, vi. 159.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sikkah (<em>pl.</em> Sikak) = (amongst other meanings) “an iron post or stake” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 380.</li>
				<li class="c029">Silk, Moslems may be shrouded in it, i. 26.</li>
				<li class="c029">Silken napkins, iv. 55.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— platters, iii. 93.</li>
				<li class="c029">Simá’a <em>lit.</em> hearing applied idiomatically to the ecstacy of Darwayshes when listening to esoteric poetry, v. 151.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sim’án-son = son of Simeon, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, a Christian, ii. 175.</li>
				<li class="c029">Símiyá = fascination (a form of magic) vi. 132.</li>
				<li class="c029">Simsim (or “Samsam”) The grain = <em>Sesamum Orientale</em>, iii. 370.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sin akhi-irib = Sini (Lunus, or the Moon-god) increaseth brethren (Etymology of “Sankharíb”) vi. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sín Al- (in text) = China (here “Al-Sind”) v. 194.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sinaubar (<em>tr.</em> “pine”) may also mean pistachio-tree, vi. 163.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sind Revisited quoted, iv. 8; v. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (so-called from Sindhu, the Indus, <em>Pers.</em> “Sindáb”) v. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sindiyán (from the Persian) = holm-oak, i. 247.</li>
				<li class="c029">Singing and music blameable (Makrúh), though not actually damnable, ii. 46.</li>
				<li class="c029">Síníyah = tray of tinned copper, iv. 170.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sir fí hálik (<em>pron.</em> Sirfhák) = Go about thy business, ii. 44.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sirhán = wolf, iv. 19.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sirr (a secret), afterwards Kitman (concealment) = keeping a lover down-hearted, ii. 218.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Sirru ’l-iláhi,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, the soul which is “<span xml:lang="la">divinæ particula auræ</span>” (<em>tr.</em> “Divine mystery”) v. 466.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sirt’anta = thou hast become (for Sirtu ana = I have become) v. 86.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sístán (Persian) <em>Arab.</em> Sijistán, i. 56.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sitt al-Miláh = Lady or princess of the Fair (ones) ii. 155.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Sitt-há” (<em>Arab.</em>), <em>tr.</em> “Mistress” (Mauritanians prefers “Sídah” and Arabian Arabs “Kabírah”) = the first lady, <i><span xml:lang="fr">Madame Mère</span></i>, v. 364.</li>
				<li class="c029">Siwán (<em>Arab.</em>) pl. Siwáwín = pavilion, iv. 113.</li>
				<li class="c029">Skin of wild ass produce the famous shagreen, iii. 282.</li>
				<li class="c029">Slave become a King (no shame to Moslems) i. 348.</li>
				<li class="c029">Slaves fond of talking over their sale, ii. 94.</li>
				<li class="c029">——, when useless, made to “walk a plank” or tossed into the sea, v. 405.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sleep at mid-forenoon (and afternoon) considered unwholesome by Easterns, iv. 324.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— with both feet in one stocking” (Irish saying for “Have a care of thyself”) v. 442.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sleeping postures, iii. 183.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— with drawn sword between man and maid, iii. 116.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Smell the air” = a walk, a “constitutional,” iii. 397.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Smoke of camel’s dung” to drive off Evil Spirits, iv. 78.</li>
				<li class="c029">Smoking and coffee, v. 236.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sneezes (ceremony when a Moslem), iv. 95.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Snsál” for “Salsál” = <em>lit.</em> chain (<em>tr.</em> “borders”) vi. 235.</li>
				<li class="c029">Soghd Samarkand = plain of Samarkand, iii. 436.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Solaced himself by gazing upon the trees and waters,” a feeling well known to the traveller, v. 390.</li>
				<li class="c029">Soldiers serving on feudal tenure, i. 256.</li>
				<li class="c029">Solomon’s Judgment, Moslem version of, iv. 236.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Some one to back us,” i. 135.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Son of a minute, The,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, which would take effect in the shortest time, iii. 171.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Son of the Road” = a mere passer-by, a stranger, ii. 235.</li>
				<li class="c029">Son (youngest of three) generally Fortune’s favourite in folk-lore, iii. 453.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sons = Men, a characteristic Arab. idiom, i. 2.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— of Adam = his Moslem neighbours, ii. 30.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— of the Path = Travellers, nomads, wild Arabs, ii. 213.</li>
				<li class="c029">Soudans, Two, iv. 305.</li>
				<li class="c029">Soul of Prince who had perished (seeking to release) iii. 298.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Spare not blows to thy child,” a barbarous sentiment of Biblical inspiration, vi. 9.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— the rod and spoil the child,” vi. 9.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Spoiling for a fight,” ii. 199.</li>
				<li class="c029">Spreading (the mats, mattresses, rugs, etc., of well-to-do Eastern lodging) v. 233.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Squeezed my ribs,” a bear-like attack, common amongst lower orders of Egypt and Syria, ii. 47.</li>
				<li class="c029">Standards and colours, an unfailing accompaniment of the Jinn army, iv. 89</li>
				<li class="c029">“Stick wherewith he tapped and drew lines in absent fashion on the ground,” v. 10.</li>
				<li class="c029">Stirrup, The Arab, iii. 478.</li>
				<li class="c029">Stomach has two mouths, œsophagic above and pyloric below, v. 52.</li>
				<li class="c029">Stone tied in kerchief or rag, weapon for fighting, v. 350.</li>
				<li class="c029">Story of the First Lunatic (variants) iv. 49.</li>
				<li class="c029">Story-telling, servile work, v. 34.</li>
				<li class="c029">St. Paul, called by the Christians in Syria “Shuhrúr al-Kanísah,” the Blackbird of the Church (on account of his eloquence) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 151.</li>
				<li class="c029">Stranger invites a guest during pilgrimage-time, i. 195.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Striking palm upon palm,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, in sign of despair, iv. 252.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— the nape = “boxing ears” (Moslem equiv.) vi. 35.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Subaudi” = “that hath not been pierced” (a virgin) v. 223.</li>
				<li class="c029">Subjects (men who pay taxes) i. 256.</li>
				<li class="c029">Subjects (Persian) both women and men are virtually King’s slaves, iii. 533.</li>
				<li class="c029">Subú’ (<em>Arab.</em>) for Yaum al-Subú’ = Septena-festival on the seventh day after a birth, marriage, or return from pilgrimage, iv. 122.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sufrah = the cloth (<em>tr.</em> “table cloth”) iv. 69.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— of leather = circular leather which acts as provision bag and tablecloth, iv. 162.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— umm jalájil (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>lit.</em> = an eating cloth with little bells, iv. 169.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sugar (Europe-made white) avoided by Moslems as unlawful, v. 352.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Sukkar), v. 352.</li>
				<li class="c029">Suicide, Hindus adepts in, iii. 166.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— rare in Moslem lands, i. 325.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sujjádah = <em>lit.</em> a praying carpet (<em>tr.</em> “rug”) iv. 52; v. 225.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sukkar from <em>Pers.</em> “Shakkar” (whence Lat. Saccharum) the generic term, v. 352.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sullam (<em>pl.</em> “Salálim”) popularly used for a flight of steps (<em>tr. here</em> souterrain-stairs) iii. 75.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sultan, amongst Arabs may denote any dignity from a Shaykh to a Sultan, vi. 226.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— and his Sons etc.,” same as Scott’s “Story of the Three Princes, etc.,” iv. 44.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— of Al-Yaman and his three Sons (<em>ver.</em> taken from Zotenberg’s “Chronique de Tabari”), iv. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— of the Jánn preceded by sweepers;</li>
				<li class="c029">always appears in the form of “second sight” called by Egyptians “Darb al-Mandal,” iv. 45.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sultanate for Women Custom of Al-Islam, a strong precedent against queenly rule, i. 350.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sulúk (<em>Arab.</em>) a sufistical expression, the road to salvation (<em>tr.</em> “paths”), iii. 185.</li>
				<li class="c029">Summák = a plant with acid flavour, dried, pounded, and peppered with meat, vi. 160.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sun fare backwards = “to eclipse the sun,” vi. 107.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sunnah = the practice, etc., of the Prophet, v. 193.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— and Farz = The practice (of the Prophet) and the Holy Law (Koranic) ii. 10.</li>
				<li class="c029">Supernatural agency makes the most satisfactory version of tale, v. 118.</li>
				<li class="c029">Supper comes first because the day begins at sundown, iv. 120.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (“dinner after midnight”). See Shah’s diary (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 244.</li>
				<li class="c029">Surah = Koranic chapter; here possibly clerical error for Súrah sort (of food), ii. 173.</li>
				<li class="c029">Suráyyát (<em>lit.</em> the Pleiades) and Sham’ádin, a would-be plural (Arabic) of the Persian “Sham’adán” = candlestick, chandelier, iii. 109.</li>
				<li class="c029">Surúr = joy, contentment, v. 200.</li>
				<li class="c029">Súsah (<em>Arab.</em>) = weevil, moth, worm, iv. 23.</li>
				<li class="c029">Súsan = the lily (in Heb.) ii. 116.</li>
				<li class="c029">Su’ubán (<em>Arab.</em>) = cockatrice (<em>tr.</em> “Basilisk”) v. 427.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Suwán” (<em>Arab.</em>) lit. = rock syenite, hard stone, flint (<em>tr.</em> “mace”) iv. 24.</li>
				<li class="c029">Suwaydá al-Kalb (the black one of the heart) = original sin (synonymous with “Habbat al-Kalb” = the grain in the heart), both metaphorically used for “original sin.” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) vi. 247.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Suwayd” and “Suwaydá,” diminutives of “Aswad” = black. (<span class="sc">St.</span>) vi. 247.</li>
				<li class="c029">Suwaydá, <em>lit.</em> “a small and blackish woman,” vi. 247.</li>
				<li class="c029">Swooper of the Jinn, ii. 202.</li>
				<li class="c029">Symmetromania, Arab., iv. 67.</li>
				<li class="c029">Syria, city of (“the stubbornest of places and the feeblest of races”) v. 41.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Syrian and three women of Cairo” (Variants) v. 273.</li>
				<li class="c005">Ta’-ám = Millet seed (<em>tr.</em> “grain”) i. 5.</li>
				<li class="c029">Taannafú = making “long noses,” i. 300.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ta’arkalak, (<em>Arab.</em>) = waylay thee, vi. 7.</li>
				<li class="c029">Taawíl = the commentary or explanation of Moslem Holy Writ, v. 43.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ta’ayyun = influence (especially by the “’Ayn” (evil) Eye) <em>tr.</em> “fascinate,” v. 166.</li>
				<li class="c029">Táb = “tip-cat,” ii. 54.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tábah = gag, vi. 184.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tabaristán (adj. Tabari), whereas Tabaráni = native of Tiberias, i. 94.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tabariyyah = Gennesaret (Chinnereth, Cinneroth) where, according to some Moslems, <em>the</em> Solomon was buried, vi. 101.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tabíb Al- = the scientific practitioner (in pop. parlance) v. 326.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tabshálím, (a word which appears to be a corruption bearing a resemblance to “Dabshalim,” meaning “a mighty king”) vi. 23.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ta’dilú = Swerve (also “Ye do injustice”) i. 52.</li>
				<li class="c029">Táf (Al-) a suburb of Baghdah, ii. 71.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tafazzal (<em>Arab.</em>) a useful word employed in invitations, equiv. to “Have the kindness” iv. 84; <ul><li>Tafazzalú, iv. 233.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c029">Taffaytu-hu = extinguish (<em>tr.</em> “put it out”) iii. 84.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tafl (<em>Arab.</em>) = a kind of clay, iii. 348.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tafrik wa’l-jam’a = division and union, i. 222.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tá-Há = the Koranic chapter No. XX. revealed at Meccah, v. 180.</li>
				<li class="c029">——, whose first 14–16 verses are said to have converted the hard-headed Omar, vi. 157.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Tahlíl” = making word or deed canonically lawful, v. 43.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tahrím = rendering any action “harám” or unlawful, v. 43.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tahzib—reforming morals, amending conduct, etc., ii. 240.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tai = Man of the tribe of Tay, i. 180.</li>
				<li class="c029">Taí Al- (relative adjective of irregular formation) v. 46.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tail, lashing his (lion’s) symptom of rage distinguishing felines from canines, iv. 161.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tá’il al-Wasf = “Drawer out of Descriptions,” v. 185.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tajní = <em>lit.</em> thou pluckest (the fruit of good deeds) vi. 104.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tajrís, rendered by a circumlocution “Bell,” v. 337.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ták (or Tákah) = a little wall-niche, iii. 351.</li>
				<li class="c029">Takbír and Tahlíl, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, Crying the war cry, “Alláho Akbar” = “God is most Great,” and “Lá iláha illa ’llah” the refrain of Unity, v. 403.</li>
				<li class="c029">Takhsa-u, <em>tr.</em> “baffled,” a curious word of venerable age (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 44.</li>
				<li class="c029">Takht Raml = table of sand, geomantic table, v. 153.</li>
				<li class="c029">Takhtrawán = mule-litter, vi. 181.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ta’kil (<em>Arab.</em>) tying up a camel’s foreleg above the knee, iv. 23.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tákiyah = litter, i. 99.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = calotte or skull-cap, iv. 120.</li>
				<li class="c029">Takrit, a town in Mesopotamia celebrated for its velvets, etc. (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 337.</li>
				<li class="c029">Takrúri = a Moslem negroid from Central and Western North Africa, iv. 298.</li>
				<li class="c029">Takwà (form gen. used for “Ittikà”) = fearing God, vi. 96.</li>
				<li class="c029">Talákan báinan = a triple divorce before witnesses, ii. 148.</li>
				<li class="c029">Talámizah = disciples (sing. Talmíz) i. 251.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tale of the Simpleton Husband i. 239. (W. M. Version) v. 116.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tales were told before the peep of day, i. 359.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tamanná (<em>Arab.</em>) = “She saluted the king by kissing her finger tips and raising them to her brow,” iii. 108.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tamásil = (the Pavilion of) Pictures (generally carved images), i. 29.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tambúr der. from “Tabl” = a drum (hence modern “Tambour”) iv. 209.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tá-mera (Coptic) = the Land of the Nile Flood, vi. 12.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tamím (<em>Arab.</em>) pl. of Tamímat = spells, charms, amulets, “Thummim,” iv. 332.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tamkín = gravity, assurance (<em>tr.</em> “Self-possession”) ii. 8.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tamtar Aysh? (<em>Arab.</em>) <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, Ayyu Shayyin “What do the skies rain!” iv. 207.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tannúr = large earthern jar (<em>tr.</em> “oven-jar”) i. 208.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = oven, (misprint for “Kubúr” = Tombs) i. 265.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tanzíl = coming down, revelation of the Koran, v. 43.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tarábulus-town (also Atrábulus) arabisations of Tripolis, iv. 169.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tarajjama, frequently used in this MS. (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 242.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = he deprecated, v. 12.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Tarajjum,” taking refuge from Satan the Stoned (Rajím) vi. 190.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tarammá al-Mahramah (throwing the handkerchief) used in the old forms of choosing a mate, iv. 31.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tarbíyatí = yearling, i. 348.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tarfah = Tamarisk, ii. 252.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tari (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>lit.</em> = wet (<em>tr.</em> “soothing”) iv. 71.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tarjumán = a dragoman (<em>tr.</em> “Truchman”) ii. 185; vi. 89.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tarjumánah (<em>fem.</em> of “Tarjumán” = a dragoman) = <em>lit.</em> an “interpreter” woman, vi. 89.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tarkah = “A gin,” a snare, i. 16.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tartara (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>tr.</em> “perked up” (prob. an emphatic reduplication of Tarra = “sprouting, pushing forward”) v. 443.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tasawwuf (mystic fraternity of) v. 426.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tasht = “basin” (the consonantic outline being the same as of “tashshat”) = she was raining, sprinkling (<span class="sc">St.</span>) a possible pun, v. 147.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tasill sallata’l-Munkatí’ín = <em>lit.</em> “raining on the drouth-hardened earth of the cut-off” (<em>tr.</em> “Watering the dry ground”) i. 345.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tastaghís (<em>Arab.</em>) = <em>lit.</em> crying out “Wa Ghausáh!”—“Ho to my aid” (<em>tr.</em> “Help! Help!”) v. 157.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tatadakhkhal ’alay-h = “sue his protection,” vi. 134.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tauhán al-Husán, <em>tr.</em> “lost in the waste,” v. 409.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tawáf = Circuiting (an act of worship) iii. 298.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tawánís (instead of “Tawánis,” <em>pl.</em> of Taunas), <em>tr.</em> “cordage” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 133.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tayhál (<em>pl.</em> “Tawáhil”) for the usual “Tihál” = spleen (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 53.</li>
				<li class="c029">Taylasán-hood, iv. 34.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tays = myriads of, vi. 187.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tayyibah = the good, sweet or lawful, v. 43.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tazaghzagha, <em>gen.</em> = he spoke hesitatingly, he scoffed (<em>tr.</em> “waxed wroth”) v. 106.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Tazaghghara fí-hi” (rendered pop.) “he pitched into him” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 106.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tazarghít (error for “Zaghrítah”) = the cry of joy, v. 429.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (numerous forms of) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 430.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Ten camel loads” about a ton, at the smallest computation of 200 lbs. to each beast, v. 395.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ter-il-bas (Tayr Táús?), a kind of peacock, made to determine elections by alighting on the head of a candidate, v. 26, 27. (Old Translation.)</li>
				<li class="c029">Teshurah = a gift offered with the object of being admitted to the presence, iii. 100.</li>
				<li class="c029">Thag, <em>equiv.</em> to our English “Thug,” iii. 374.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = simply a “cheat,” but may also mean a robber, assassin, etc. (<em>tr.</em> “Bandits”) iii. 374.</li>
				<li class="c029">Thaghr al-Khánakán = The narrows of the (Dervishes’) convent, ii. 74.</li>
				<li class="c029">Thakálah (<em>Arab.</em>) = heaviness, dulness, stupidity (<em>tr.</em> “horseplay”) v. 457.</li>
				<li class="c029">Thaníyyat al-’Ukáb = the Vulture’s Pass, vi. 181.</li>
				<li class="c029">“That a standard be borne over his head,” i. 161.</li>
				<li class="c029">Thayyib (<em>Arab.</em>) = a woman who has known man but once, iv. 333.</li>
				<li class="c029">“The Astrologers lied,” i. 122.</li>
				<li class="c029">Theatre (shifting) iii. 429.</li>
				<li class="c029">The babe to the blanket, and the adultress to the stone, i. 271.</li>
				<li class="c029">“The chick is unsatisfied till, etc.” a translation which presupposes the reading “Farkhah lá atammat” and would require “hattà” or “ilà” to express “till” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 302.</li>
				<li class="c029">“The green stick is of the trees of Paradise,” vi. 9.</li>
				<li class="c029">“The hoard hath gone from me, and I have waxed feeble,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, his strength was in the gold, iv. 347.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Them” for “her” (often occurrence of) v. 178.</li>
				<li class="c029">“There is not a present (Teshurah) to bring to the man of God,” iii. 100.</li>
				<li class="c029">“The reed-pen wrote what ’twas bidden write” = “Destiny so willed it,” vi. 51.</li>
				<li class="c029">“There is no harm to thee, and boon of health befal thee,” auspicious formula, vi. 174.</li>
				<li class="c029">The sumptuary laws compelling Jews to wear yellow turbands, i. 286.</li>
				<li class="c029">The sand appeared in the sunlight like unto ropes (author and Steingass explain) vi. 32.</li>
				<li class="c029">“The world was turned topsy-turvy,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, there was a great movement and confusion, iv. 262.</li>
				<li class="c029">Thieves with hands lopped off, ii. 44.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Thine is ours and on thee shall be whatso is on us” = we will assume thy debts and responsibilities, ii. 247.</li>
				<li class="c029">Thirst takes precedence of hunger, iii. 320.</li>
				<li class="c029">This girl is a fat piece of meat (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “There are good pickings to be had out of this job”) ii. 17.</li>
				<li class="c029">This matter is not far to us = “is not beyond our reach,” v. 311.</li>
				<li class="c029">“This night” for “last night,” vi. 128.</li>
				<li class="c029">Thiyáb ’Amúdiyah = striped clothes, ii. 79.</li>
				<li class="c029">Those noble steps = thine auspicious visits, ii. 82.</li>
				<li class="c029">Thou comest to bring us victory = “thou comest to our succour,” ii. 201.</li>
				<li class="c029">Thought reading, iii. 539.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Thou hast been absent overlong,” a kindly phrase pop. addressed to the returning traveller, v. 444.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Thou hast done justice” (’adalta), also means “Thou hast swerved from right.” “Thou hast wrought equitably” also = “Thou hast transgressed,” i. 51.</li>
				<li class="c029">Three Sisters and their Mother, Defects in the Story of, iv. 165</li>
				<li class="c029">“Three things lack permanency, Wealth without trading, Learning without disputation, Government without justice,” (Sa’di in the Gulistan) iii. 6.</li>
				<li class="c029">Throwing the kerchief (tarammá al Mahramah) used in the old form of choosing a mate, iv. 31. See iv. 264.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Thummim” <em>der. from</em> “Tôm” = completeness, iv. 332.</li>
				<li class="c029">Thursday = pay day for the boys in Egypt, iv. 98.</li>
				<li class="c029">Thrust his finger up his fundament (a diabolical way of clapping hands in applause) ii. 89.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Thy commands, O my mother, be upon my head,” iii. 89.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Thy Highness,” a form of addressing royalty common in Austria, iii. 108.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Thy rose-hued cheek showeth writ newwrit,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, the growing beard and whisker is compared with black letters on a white ground, v. 148.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tigris, The (Hid-dekel) iv. 151.</li>
				<li class="c029">Time, division of, in China and Japan, v. 90.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tín (<em>Arab.</em>) = clay, mud (used with Tob forming walls of Egypt and Assyria) vi. 24.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Tirrea Bede” (Night 655) note concerning, v. 119.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Tis more acceptable to me than a red camel, ii. 248.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tisht (a basin for the ewer), <em>tr.</em> “tray,” v. 428.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tither, unable to do evil, i. 245.</li>
				<li class="c029">TKhDH (=takhuz-hu, according to author); may be either 2nd or 8th form of “ahad” in the sense that “thou comest to an agreement (Ittihád) with him,” v. 189.</li>
				<li class="c029">TMT, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, Tammat = She (the tale) is finished, vi. 38.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tobáni = unbaked brick, i. 34.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tobbas = “Successors” or the Himyaritic kings, ii. 263.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tobe = the Anglo-Oriental form of “Thaub” = in Arabia a loose robe like a night-gown, vi. 139.</li>
				<li class="c029">“To-day wine, and to-morrow business,” ii. 177.</li>
				<li class="c029">“To eat skite” = to talk or act foolishly, vi. 70.</li>
				<li class="c029">Toilette, carrying a portable, iv. 303.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tohfah = A gift, i. 16.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = a choice gift, ii. 79.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tohfat al-Humaká = Choice Gift of the Fools, ii. 73.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Kulúb = Choice Gift of the Hearts, ii. 73.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tohfat al-Sudúr = Choice Gift of the Breasts (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, of the hearts) ii. 84–133.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tomb of the Moslem, iv. 293.</li>
				<li class="c029">Torture endured through Eastern obstinacy, i. 293.</li>
				<li class="c029">Towáb Al- (<em>Arab. pl.</em> of <em>Per.</em> and <em>Turk.</em> “Top”) = cannon, vi. 186.</li>
				<li class="c029">Trafír = trumpets, iii. 137.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Treasure-trove,” the possession of exposing the owner to torture, iii. 105.</li>
				<li class="c029">True believer imitates sayings and doings of the Apostle, ii. 173.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tú bará Thag hai = thou art a precious rascal, iii. 374.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tuhà = cooked meat, vi. 187.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tuhál or Tihál (<em>Arab.</em>) in text “Tayhál,” <em>tr.</em> “spleen,” v. 53.</li>
				<li class="c029">Turayyih (<em>mod. form for</em> “turawwih”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 301.</li>
				<li class="c029">Turcoman blood (steed of) iii. 297.</li>
				<li class="c029">Turkish Tales by Petis de la Croix, iv. 13.</li>
				<li class="c029">Turkumániyah = Turcomanish (<em>tr.</em> “dragomanish”) ii. 191.</li>
				<li class="c029">Turquoise stone, held as a talisman in the East, iii. 270.</li>
				<li class="c029">Turtúr = the Badawi’s bonnet, v. 255.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Tutmájíyah” for “Tútmáj” = vermicelli, vi. 160.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tutty, in low Lat. “Tutia” prob. from <em>Pers.</em> “Tutiyah” = protoxide of zinc, v. 352.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tuzáribí may mean “Dost thou play the part of” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) vi. 57.</li>
				<li class="c029">Twelvemonths, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, a long time, i. 319.</li>
				<li class="c005">“Uaddíki,” Taadiyah (iid. of Adá, he assisted) = sending, forwarding (<em>tr.</em> “Carry”) ii. 77.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Ubb (<em>Arab.</em>) = bulge between breast and outer robe (<em>tr.</em> “breast pocket”) iii. 317.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Úd = primarily “wood”; then a “lute” (<em>tr.</em> here “fuel”) ii. 178.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Úd Khayrázan = wood of the rattan, iv. 317.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Udúl (<em>pl.</em> of Adil) = men of good repute (<em>tr.</em> “notables”) ii. 25.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ukiyyah (or Wukiyyah) = ounce = 571·5 to 576 grains, vi. 163.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Uktuli’s-siráj,” the Persian “Chirághrá bi-kush” = kill the lamp, iii. 84.</li>
				<li class="c029">Umm Kash’am, a slang name for death, iv. 183.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ummálí (<em>Arab.</em>); <em>gen.</em> Ummál, an affirmation (<em>tr.</em> “True indeed”) iv. 193.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Ummár = the Jinn (<em>tr.</em> “Haunters”) ii. 102.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ummu ’Amrin = mother of ’Amru (slang term for “hyæna”) iv. 183.</li>
				<li class="c029">Under my ribs = In my heart’s core, i. 339.</li>
				<li class="c029">Unsa-k (<em>Arab.</em>), an expression used when drinking one’s health (<em>tr.</em> “Thy favour”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 458.</li>
				<li class="c029">Unth = Camel, iii. 294.</li>
				<li class="c029">Urím (lights) and Thummim (amulets), iv. 332.</li>
				<li class="c029">Urinal (old French name for phial in which the patient’s water is sent) i. 285.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Urkúb, a Jew of Yathrib, ii. 164.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Urrah (<em>Arab.</em>) = dung, v. 75.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Urs (Al-) w’al-Tuhúr = “the wedding” (which does not drop out of the tale) and the circumcision, ii. 90.</li>
				<li class="c029">Usburú = be ye patient, v. 83.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ushtur or “Unth” = camel, iii. 294.</li>
				<li class="c005">Veil me = protect my honour, ii. 147.</li>
				<li class="c029">Veil (raiser of) means a fitting purchaser, ii. 73.</li>
				<li class="c029">Vellication (in cases of axilla-pile), iv. 153.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Verily great is their craft” (Koranic quotation from “Joseph”), v. 294.</li>
				<li class="c029">Viaticum = provision, provaunt for the way, iv. 304.</li>
				<li class="c029">Vijáyanagara = City of Victory, iii. 422.</li>
				<li class="c029">Violateth my private apartment, ii. 243.</li>
				<li class="c029">Violation of the Harem (son “having” his father’s wives), very common in Egypt, v. 441.</li>
				<li class="c029">Virginity (how proved), iv. 121.</li>
				<li class="c029">Visions frequent in Al-Islam, iii. 405.</li>
				<li class="c029">Vocative particles (five in Arabic), i. 85.</li>
				<li class="c029">Voice (mysterious), ii. 51.</li>
				<li class="c029">Voices disembodied, iii. 515.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— from the other world, vi. 227.</li>
				<li class="c029">Vows of Pious Moslems, v. 234.</li>
				<li class="c005">Wa adraka Shahrázáda’l-Sabáh = And Shahrazad <em>perceived</em> the dawn of</li>
				<li class="c029">day (also “was surprised by the dawn”) iv. 6.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wa’d al-Banât, or burial of Mauúdát (living daughter) iii. 498.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Wá Ghausáh!” = “Ho, to my aid,” v. 157.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Wahá,” etc. (<em>Arab.</em>) corresponding with Syriac “ho” = behold! i. 275.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Wa Hakki man aulání házá ’l-Mulk” = “and by the right of (my duty towards) Him who made me ruler over this kingdom” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 307.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— inní la-ar’ákum wa ar’à widádakum,” etc., <em>tr.</em> “And I make much of you and your love, etc.” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 172.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— jasad-hu yuhazdimu = his body was emitting blood freely (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 285.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— Kita’h hamrah,” <em>tr.</em> “also a bit of cooked meat,” vi. 125.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Kulli Tárik = night traveller, magician, morning star, v. 378.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— Kuntu ráihah ursil warák” (the regular Fellah language) i. 29.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— lákin hú ajmalu etc.” = “and yet he was more beautiful than they, etc.” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 260.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— lá ahad tafawwaha fína” = “nor hath anyone ever spoken,” vi. 29.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— lá huwa ashamná min-ka talkas” (read “talkash”) ’alà Harimi-ná” <em>tr.</em> “that thou wouldst strive to seduce our Harím” (or “that thou hadst an itching after our Harím”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 285.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— lásh: Murádí bas ism al-Madinah” (<em>Arab.</em>) = For nothing: my only want is the city’s name, v. 402.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— lau anunahá li ’l-Mushrikín, etc.,” lines which have occurred before, v. 55.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— lláhi ’l-Muwaffiku ’l-Mu’ín” = God prospereth and directeth (a formula often prefixed to a book), vi. 196.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— min-hum man fáha,” evidently an error of the scribe for “Man nafá-hu,” v. 114.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Nikáh = conjugal intercourse, v. 153.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— sába’l-dár wa Zaujatu-hu mutawassín bi-há,” <em>tr.</em> “the house prospered for the master and the dame had charge of it,” v. 420.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Wa sába’l-dár wa Zaujatu-hu mutawassín bi-há,” Steingass explains the plural “Mutawassin,” by supposing “Sáb al-Dár” is blunder for “Sáhihu ’l-Dár” and translates “the master of the house and his wife took charge of her (the nurse) during the days of suckling” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 420.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— Sawábi ’hu (Asábi ’a-hu?) fí hanaki-h’” <em>tr.</em> “his fingers in his mouth and sucking thereat,” v. 419.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Talattuf Alfázak wa ma’áník alhísán = and for the pleasingness of thy sayings and meanings so fine and fain (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 146.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— yabkí ’alaykum Mabálu-h” = suffer only his crime be upon you (Steingass reads “Wabál” for “Mabál,” and translates, “lest the guilt of it rest upon you”) vi. 246.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— zand mujauhar fí-hi Asáwir,” etc., may mean “and a forearm (became manifest) ornamented with jewels, on which were bracelets of red gold” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 86–7.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— zarr-há” for “Wa dazz-há” = besprinkled her (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 314.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— dazzh-á (corruption in MS.) should read “wa wazzar-há” = “and he left her” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 462.</li>
				<li class="c029">Waddí = Carry, i. 17.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wadí’ah = deposit (here sig. blows), i. 247.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wafát = death (decease, departure, as opposed to Maut = death), 223.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Wáhid min al-Tujjár,” the very vulgar style, iii. 64.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wahsh = Lion, iii. 18.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wahwah Al- = the hue of metal leaves, vi. 122.</li>
				<li class="c029">Waka’h (<em>Arab.</em>) = an affair (of fight) v. 403.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wakálah = a khan or caravanserai, iv. 38.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = an inn (<em>tr.</em> “Caravanserai”), v. 455.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (Egyptian term for a Khan) ii. 153.</li>
				<li class="c029">“——” or caravanserai, v. 273.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wakhímah = an unhealthy land, ii. 87.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wakíl (<em>Arab.</em>) = deputy—in marriage, 333; <ul><li><em>lit.</em> = agent (<em>tr.</em> “trustee”) here corresponding with man who gives away the bride, iv. 54.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c029">Wakt al-Zuhá (<em>Arab.</em>) = the division of</li>
				<li class="c029">time between sunrise and midday (<em>tr.</em> “undurn hour”) iv. 69.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Wa’l-Sultánu karaa, etc.” = “and the Sovran recited his appointed portion of the Koran, and then sat down to convivial converse” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 244.</li>
				<li class="c029">Walad al-Hayáh (for “Hayát”) <em>tr.</em> “Thou make him a child of life,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, let him be long-lived, v. 378.</li>
				<li class="c029">Walásh (<em>Arab.</em>), <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> “Was lá shayya” = and nihil (<em>tr.</em> “Anaught”) iv. 210.</li>
				<li class="c029">Walawá’yh? = wa’l-aw’iyah (<em>pl.</em> of wi’á) = and the vessels —— shimmered like unto silver for their cleanliness, (<span class="sc">St.</span>) vi. 122.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wálí = the Civil Governor, iii. 375.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— at one time a Civil Governor, and in other ages a Master of Police, vi. 67.</li>
				<li class="c029">Walímah <em>prop.</em> = a marriage feast, iii. 15.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Waliyah” or “Waliyáh” = and why? vi. 59.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Walwalah” or “Wilwál” (an onomatopy), general term for the wail, vi. 17.</li>
				<li class="c029">Warayataní ilà -turáb = thou hast given me over to the ground or concealment (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 312.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wasayah (prob. cler. error for “wa Miah”—spelt “máyah”—and a hundred pair of pigeons) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 217.</li>
				<li class="c029">Washing hands and face—a preparatory washing as a matter of cleanliness preceding the formal Wuzú-ablution, iii. 168.</li>
				<li class="c029">Water-closet, Eastern goes to, first thing in the morning, i. 13.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— wedding night in. iii. 115.</li>
				<li class="c029">Watukarribu ’l’-Abda ilayya (referring the verb to “Al-Sadakah” = the alms) “and in bringeth the servant near to me” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 335.</li>
				<li class="c029">Waybah = the sixth of an Ardabb (Irdabb) = bushels, v. 128.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wayha-k (before “Wayla-k”) = “Fie upon thee,” vi. 20.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wazífah <em>prop.</em> = a task, a stipend, a salary, (<em>here tr.</em> “dutie”) iii. 328.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wazir expected to know everything in Oriental countries, iii. 163.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wazíru ’l-’Arif bi-lláhi Ta’álà, Al- = The Wazir-wise-in-Allah-Almighty, iv. 239.</li>
				<li class="c029">“We are broken to bits (Kisf,) by our own sin,” i. 155.</li>
				<li class="c029">Weapons and furniture, (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, headstalls, hobbles, etc.), for mare saddled and bridled (price for slave) vi. 92.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— taken from Easterns when embarking as passengers, ticketed and placed in cabin, v. 403.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wedding, description of, iii. 114.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— -night in water-closet, iii. 115.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— night, mothers tell their daughters what to expect, iv. 42.</li>
				<li class="c029">Week days, vi. 13.</li>
				<li class="c029">Well, Angels choking up a, v. 332.</li>
				<li class="c029">——, filled in over the intruding “villain” of the piece, v. 332.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wept and laughed alternately (nearest approach in East. tales to West. hysterics) iv. 155.</li>
				<li class="c029">“What hast thou left behind thee, O, Asám”? <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> What didst thou see? i. 97.</li>
				<li class="c029">What is behind thee? = What is thy news? i. 44.</li>
				<li class="c029">“What’s past is past and what is written is written and shall come to pass” (Sir C. Murray’s “Hassan”) iii. 10.</li>
				<li class="c029">What was his affair? = <em>lit.</em> “How was,” etc., i. 58.</li>
				<li class="c029">“When Adam dolve and Eve span,” etc., vi. 102.</li>
				<li class="c029">When Fate descended (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> When the fated hour came down from Heaven), i. 62.</li>
				<li class="c029">Where am I, and where is the daughter, etc.? = “What have I to do with, etc.”, ii. 7.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Where is the bird?” = “How far is the fowl from thee?” iv. 300.</li>
				<li class="c029">White hand, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> gifts and presents, i. 226.</li>
				<li class="c029">“White” night, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> “pleasant,” “enjoyable,” iv. 285.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Whose van was not known from its rear” = “both could not be seen at the same time,” v. 189.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— weal Allah increase,” well nigh sole equiv. amongst Moslems of our “thank you,” v. 325.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein,” i. 119.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Whoso journeyeth not enjoyeth not,” ii. 152.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Whoso keeneth for himself is not like whoso is hired to keen.” <em>Proverb</em> = “If you want a thing done, etc.,” ii. 171.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Whoso leaveth issue dieth not” (popular saying amongst Moslems) iii. 55.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wife (exalting the character of) whilst the Mistress is a mere shadow (kind of tale not unfrequent amongst Moslems) v. 335.</li>
				<li class="c029">“——” used for “Harim,” iv. 28.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wiják = a stove, a portable hearth (<em>tr.</em> “a brazier”) v. 110.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wild ass (onager) iii. 282.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— meat of, iii. 282.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (skin of) produces the famous Shagreen, iii. 282.</li>
				<li class="c029">Will of man, The, a mighty motor power, iii. 426; vi. 126.</li>
				<li class="c029">Window gardening, an ancient practice in the East, vi. 172.</li>
				<li class="c029">Windows (first mention of in Arabic MS. of “Alaeddin”) iii. 186.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wine and Wassail, loose talk, etc., a favourite subject with lewd Moslems, ii. 34.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wine, carrion and pork lawful to Moslem if used to save life, ii. 176.</li>
				<li class="c029">Witch, i. 235.</li>
				<li class="c029">“With the tongue of the case” = words suggested by the circumstance, v. 9.</li>
				<li class="c029">“With love and gladness,” ii. 137.</li>
				<li class="c029">Without a vein swelling, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, so drunk that his circulation had apparently stopped, v. 276.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wizzatayn = geese, v. 357.</li>
				<li class="c029">Woman, fulfilling the desires of, fatal to love, when she revolts against any reduction of it, v. 91.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Womankind, Allah kill all” (note by Dr. Steingass) v. 304.</li>
				<li class="c029">Women (Alaeddin used to think all resembled his mother); an absurd statement to the West but true in the East, iii. 97.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (all of one and the same taste) i. 96.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— are of little wits and lack religion,” i. 31.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— drousy charms of, ii. 252.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wonders of the (Moslem) World—four in number, iv. 36.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wormwood, a regular Badawi remedy, iv. 343.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wortley Montague MS. quoted, iv. 3, 6, 19, 35, 49, 74, 90, 95, 97, 101, 109.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Woven air,” local name of the Patna gauzes, iii. 423.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Writing and reading,” as opposed to our “Reading and writing,” vi. 5.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Written,” either on the Preserved Tablet or on the Sutures of the Skull, v. 308.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wuldán = Ghilmán = the boys of Paradise, vi. 128.</li>
				<li class="c005">Xerafim, <em>Port.</em> for Ashrafi, iv. 38.</li>
				<li class="c005">Yá omitted (in poetical fashion) to show speaker’s emotion, i. 149.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = í and Mím = m, composing the word “Ibrahím,” v. 203.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Abá Sábir = O Abu Sabir, i. 85.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— ’Ars, yá Mu’arras = O pimp, O pander, v. 246.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— ’Arzád” prob. cler. slip for “’Urzát” (<em>pl.</em> of ’Urzah) = a companion, a (low) fellow, iv. 191.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Yabahh” = saying “Bah, Bah!” vi. 253.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Bilál = O generosity, i. 40.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—— Bunayyí” = <em>lit.</em> “O my little son,” a term of special fondness (<em>tr.</em> “O dear, my son”) vi. 7.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yad (Al-) al-bayzá = <em>lit.</em> The white hand (<em>tr.</em> “largesse”) ii. 123.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yáfis bin Núh = Japhet, son of Noah, ii. 111.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yaftah ’Allah = Allah open (to thee the door of subsistence) ii. 44.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá Ghárati a-zay má huná Rájil = O, the shame of me! however, O my Lord, can there be here a man? v. 247.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Dr. Steingass explains and translates, v. 247.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá Hájjah (<em>pron.</em> Hággeh) = O Pilgrimess, i. 198.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá Házá (<em>Arab.</em>) = “Ho, this one,” iv. 231.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yahjubu (<em>Arab.</em>) aor. of “hajaba” = he veiled, put out of sight (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 342.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yahya (according to Scott “Yiah”) v. 153.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yáhyà, father of Ja’afar, made Wazir by Al-Rashid, i. 166.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Yá Jad’án” (more gen. “Yá Jad’a” pron. Gad’a) = mon brave, iv. 191.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá Kabírí = my good man (<em>tr.</em> “my chief”) i. 12.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yákah Thiyábish = his robe-collar rent, vi. 247.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá Kawáki = O thou brawler, vi. 84.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá Khálati = O my mother’s sister (<em>tr.</em> “O naunty mine”) i. 32.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yakhat (prob. cler. error for “Yakhbut”) <em>lit.</em> = he was panting in a state of unconsciousness, <em>tr.</em> “drowned” in sleep, vi. 244.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá Khawand = “O lord and master,” ii. 12.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Yakhburu ma’a-hu fí ’l-Kalám” <em>lit.</em> = he experimented with him, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, he put him to the test (<em>tr.</em> “he spake with him softly”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 307.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yaklishu (from ✓ Kulsh) = “kicking” (their heels) iv. 19.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá’llah, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “By Allah,” meaning “Be quick!” v. 325.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá’llah jári, yá walad = “Be off at once, boy,” i. 9.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Yállah, Yállah” = By Allah and again by Allah i. 9; <ul><li>gen. meaning “Look sharp” (here syn. with “Allah! Allah!” = “I conjure thee by God”) v. 302.</li></ul></li>
				<li class="c029">Yá Luss (<em>Arab.</em>) = “O Robber” (=the <em>Gr.</em> <span xml:lang="grc">λῃστὴς</span>) vi. 56.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá Madyúnah = O indebted one, i. 249.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yamaklak Al- = vivers, provaunt, vi. 180.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yamak (<em>Turk.</em>) = food, a meal, vi. 180.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yamámah-land, i. 43.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yaman Al-, people of, are still deep in the Sotadic Zone and practice, v. 42.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yámin, copyist’s error for “Yásimín,” <em>tr.</em> gelsamine, iii. 19.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá Mu’arras = O fool and disreputable (<em>tr.</em> “O pimp”) ii. 21.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá Nakbah = O calamity, i. 24.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yanjaaru (<em>Arab.</em>) vii. form of “jaara,” in which the idea of “raising” seems to prevail, <em>tr.</em> “mounted,” iv. 311.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yapousmek (old ver.) = “Yá Abú Sumayk,” vi. 16.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yar’ad = trembleth (also thundereth) i. 166.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá Rájul (for Rajul) = O man (an Egypto-Syrian form) iii. 58.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yarjú (presumably error for “Yarja’u”) <em>tr.</em> “retracing their steps,” v. 382.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (may be error for “Yajrú”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 382.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Yá Sallám” (<em>Arab.</em>) “O Saviour” addressed to Allah, iv. 63.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Yá Sín” = “The Heart of the Koran,” v. 94.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Yaskut min ’Aynay-h” <em>lit.</em> = fall from his two eyes, lose favour (<em>tr.</em> “lose regard with him”) i. 77.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yasrahú = roaming (<em>tr.</em> “rummaging”) iv. 19</li>
				<li class="c029">“Yasta’amilúna al-Mrd” (<em>tr.</em> “their noblest make womanly use of Murd” = beardless boys) may also have a number of meanings, v. 42.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yastanít (<em>Arab.</em>), aor. to the pretext “istanat” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 218.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yastanit = he listened attentively (<em>tr.</em> “he firmly believed”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 432.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ya Sultán-am = “O my chief,” v. 312.</li>
				<li class="c029">“——” <em>Pers.</em> or <em>Turk.</em> form for <em>Arab.</em> “Yá Sultán-i” (“O my Sultan”) iv. 214.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá Ta’ásat-ná = “O our misery,” vi. 48.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ya’tadir (dots often omitted in MS.) may mean Ya’tazir = find excuse, vi. 20.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (from ✓ ’Adr) = heavy rain, boldness (<em>tr.</em> “fortify himself”) vi. 20.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá Ta’ís = “O thou miserable,” vi. 48.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yatama’ash min-hu, <em>tr.</em> “wherewith he might nourish himself,” v. 472.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— a denominative of the 5th form of “Ma’ásh” = livelihood (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 473.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ya’tamidúna hudà-hum = purpose the right direction (<em>tr.</em> “those who seek their salvation”) ii. 32.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yatazáwadú (<em>Arab.</em>) = increasing (<em>tr.</em> “contending”) iv. 62.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ya’tazar = find excuse, vi. 20.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yatbashsh (for “yanbashsha”) = a smiling face, vi. 138.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— may also stand for Yabtashsh, with transposition of the “t” of the 8th form (<span class="sc">St.</span>) vi. 138.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yathrib = Al-Madinah, v. 183.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— the classical name (<span xml:lang="grc">Ἰατρίππα</span>)</li>
				<li class="c029">(one of the titles of “Madínat al-Nabi,” City of the Prophet) v. 43.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ya Tinjír (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>lit.</em> = O Kettle (<em>tr.</em> “O Miserable”) iv. 71.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yauh! (<em>Arab.</em>) = “Alack!” iv. 191.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yaum al-Ahad = First day (which begins the Moslem week) iv. 341.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Jum’ah (<em>Arab.</em>)—Assembly-day, Friday, iv. 342.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Khamís (<em>Arab.</em>) = fifth day, vi. 13.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Mahshar = <em>lit.</em> the day of Assembly (<em>tr.</em> Judgment Day) iii. 21.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Subú’ = 7th day, iv. 122.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá walad al-Halál = O thou true-born son (or “O! Son of lawful wedlock,”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 267.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá Wárid = “O farer to the fountain,” v. 148.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá Zínat al-Nisá = O adornment of woman-kind, ii. 207.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá zayn = oh, the beautiful beast! vi. 149.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yazghaz-há fí Shikkati-ha = verb being prob. a cler. error for “Yazaghzahg” from ✓ “Zaghzagha” = he opened a skin bag (<em>tr.</em> “thrusting and foining at her cleft”) v. 267.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Ye are quit of,” etc. = You are welcome to it and so it becomes lawful (<em>halál</em>) to you, ii. 161.</li>
				<li class="c029">Young, a man is, in Arab speech, till forty or fifty, iv. 119.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— man, being grown up, would not live in his father’s house, v. 442.</li>
				<li class="c029">Youth worn out by genial labours of the (marriage) night, but bride made the merrier and livelier (a neat touch of realism), v. 429.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yufaghghiru = he opened his mouth wide (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 265.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yughaffiru (probably for yu’ aftíru) = raising a dust cloud (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 265.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— wa yuzaghdimu = raising a dust-cloud and trumpeting with rage, iv. 265.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yulakkimu (<em>Arab.</em>) from “Lukmah” = a mouthful, vi. 75.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Yumázasa-hu fí ’l-Kalám,” evidently a clerical error for “Yumárasa-hu,” = he tested or tried him in speech (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 307.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yumkinshayy = “Is it possible,” iv. 232</li>
				<li class="c029">Yúnus = Ibn Habíb, a friend of Isaac of Mosul, ii. 71.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yuzaghdimu, a quadriliteral formed by blending two triliterals in one verb, to intensify the idea (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 265.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yúzbáshí, in text “Uzbáshá” or “úzbáshá” = head of a hundred (men), centurion, captain, v. 243.</li>
				<li class="c005">Za’amú = they opine, they declare (<em>tr.</em> “They set forth”) i. 50; ii. 55.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zabh (Zbh) (<em>Arab.</em> ✓) = the ceremonial killing of animals for food, iv. 32.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zabídún (here probably a clerical error for Zabíd, Cap. of Tahámah) ii. 193.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zábit = a Prefect of Police, vi. 154.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (from the ✓ “Zabt” = keeping in subjection, holding tight) <em>tr.</em> “Holdfast,” vi. 154.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zabtiyah = a constable, vi. 154.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Zad Yakún Z R H ahad fí Mál jazíl, etc.” (error in MS. explained) (<span class="sc">St.</span>) v. 72.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zadig (Tale of) iv. 7.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zafáir al-Jinn = Adiantum Capillus veneris, ii. 95.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zafar = victory (clerical error for Zafar = plaited hair) vi. 104.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zaghárit (<em>pl.</em> of Zaghrútah) = loud lullilooing, iv. 267.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zahab-ramlí = placer-gold, iii. 15.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zahr (<em>Arab.</em>) lit. and generically a blossom (<em>tr.</em> “orange flower”) iv. 52.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Al- = duty, vi. 162.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Bahr = the surface which affords a passage to man, iv. 125.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zahrat = a blossom especially yellow, commonly applied to orange-flower, v. 201.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al-Hayy, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “Bloom of the Tribe,” v. 201.</li>
				<li class="c029">Za’íf = impotent, i. 217.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Zakarayn Wizz (ganders) simán,” <em>tr.</em> “a pair of fatted ganders,” v. 357.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zakát = legal alms (<em>tr.</em> “poor-rates”) iv. 338.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zakát wa Sadakát = <em>lit.</em> paying of poor rate and purifying thy property by alms deeds (<em>tr.</em> “goodness and beneficence and charity and almsdoing”) i. 346.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zakka (meaning primarily “a bird feeding her young”) <em>tr.</em> “largessed,” v. 182.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zalábiyah = a pancake, i. 33.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zalamah (Al-) = the policeman (<em>tr.</em> “men of violence”) ii. 52.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zalamah (<em>Arab.</em>) = tyrants, vi. 73.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zalm = the dewlap of sheep or goat, iii. 19.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zamaku-há, <em>tr.</em> “arabesque’d,” v. 133.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zamán, Al- (<em>tr.</em> “A delay”) prob. an error for “Yá al-Malik al-Zamán” = “O King of the Age,” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) iv. 319.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zangi-i-Adam-kh’wár (<em>tr.</em> Ethiopian) afterwards called Habashi = an Abyssinian, iii. 276.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zanzibár = Blackland, iii. 281.</li>
				<li class="c029">Záraba (<em>verb</em>) 3rd form followed by acc. = “to join one in partnership” (<span class="sc">St.</span>) vi. 57.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zarábíl (comm. cor. of Zarábin = slaves’ shoes, slippers) vi. 48.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zarb al-Aklám = caligraphy, v. 376.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— —— <em>tr.</em> “penmanship,” v. 432.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— al Fál = casting lots for presage (<em>tr.</em> “prognostic”) v. 374.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— Raml (Geomancy) iii. 4.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zarbúl táki (<em>Arab.</em>) the latter meaning “high-heeled,” vi. 53.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zard-i-Kháyah (<em>Pers.</em>) = yoke of egg, iv. 56.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zardakát (for “Zardakhán”) = silken napkins, iv. 55.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Zardiyá” (for Zaradiyyah = a small mail coat, a light helmet), <em>tr.</em> “a haubergeon,” v. 58.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zawádah (gen. “Azwád” or “Azwidah”) = provisions, viaticum, vi. 181.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zayjah (from (<em>Pers.</em>) “Záycheh”) = <em>lit.</em> a horoscope (<em>tr.</em> “lot”) vi. 235.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zayn al-Asnam, object of the tale, iii. 38.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— —— (Turkish) version by Mr. Gibb (note) iii. 41.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— —— <em>old ver.</em> “Ornament” (adornment?) of the Statues, iii. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— (al-Dín = Adornment of the Faith and owner of) al-Asnám = the Images, iii. 3.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zifr = nail, claw, talon, iv. 245.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— = horny matter which, according to Moslem tradition, covered our first parents, vi. 104.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zij = table of the stars—almanack, iii. 159.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zill (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>lit.</em> = “Shadow me” (<em>tr.</em> “solace me”) iv. 58.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zimmat = obligation, protection, clientship (<em>tr.</em> “loyalty”) vi. 245.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zindík = Atheist, Agnostic, vi. 158.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zird-Khánah = armoury, i. 327.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zirtah = fart, ii. 56.</li>
				<li class="c029">Znnákt-ha, <em>tr.</em> “(striketh) her sting” (?) vi. 35.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zor-Khán = Lord Violence, i. 94.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zubayah’s tomb, i. 15.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Zug” or draught which gave him rheumatism (<em>tr.</em> “the air smote me”) v. 157.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zuhà Al- (=undurn-hour, or before noon) and Maghrib (=set of sun) become Al-Ghaylah (=Siesta time) and Ghaybat al-Shams, in Badawi speech, v. 151.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zur ghibban, tazid hibban = visits rare keep friendship fair, ii. 209.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zúshád (a fancy name) “Zawash” in Persian = <span xml:lang="grc">Ζεὺς</span>, i. 89.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zuwaylah Gate, ii. 8.</li>
			</ul>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
