<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5-39" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Di’ibil Al-Khuza’i with the Lady and Muslim Bin Al-Walid</h2>

<p>(Quoth Di’ibil al-Khuzá’i<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2254" id="noteref-2254" epub:type="noteref">2254</a>), I was sitting one day at the gate of
Al-Karkh,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2255" id="noteref-2255" epub:type="noteref">2255</a> when a damsel came past, never saw I a fairer faced or
better formed than she, walking with a voluptuous swaying gait
and ravishing all beholders with her lithe and undulating pace.
Now as my eyes fell on her, I was captivated by her and my vitals
trembled and meseemed my heart flew forth of my breast; so I
stood before her and I accosted her with this verse:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The tears of these eyes find easy release; ✿ But sleep flies these eyelids without surcease.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>Whereon she turned her face and looking at me, straightway made
answer with this distich:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">A trifle this an his eyes be sore, ✿ When her eyes say “yes” to his love-caprice!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>I was astounded at the readiness of her reply and the fluency of
her speech and rejoined with this verse:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Say, doth heart of my fair incline to him ✿ Whose tears like a swelling stream increase?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>And she answered me without hesitation, thus:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">If thou crave our love, know that love’s a loan; ✿ And a debt to be paid by us twain a-piece.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>Never entered my ears aught sweeter than her speech nor ever saw
I brighter than her face: so I changed rhyme and rhythm to try
her, in my wonder at her words, and repeated this couplet:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Will Fate with joy of union ever bless our sight, ✿ And one desireful one with other one unite.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>She smiled at this (never saw I fairer than her mouth nor sweeter
than her lips), and answered me, without stay or delay, in the
following distich:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Pray, tell me what hath Fate to do betwixt us twain? ✿ Thou’rt Fate: so bless our eyne with union and delight.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>At this, I sprang up and fell to kissing her hands and cried, “I
had not thought that Fortune would vouchsafe me such occasion.
Do thou follow me, not of bidding or against thy will, but of the
grace of thee and thy favour to me.” Then I went on and she
after me. Now at that time I had no lodging I deemed fit for the
like of her; but Muslim bin al-Walíd<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2256" id="noteref-2256" epub:type="noteref">2256</a> was my fast friend, and he
had a handsome house. So I made for his abode and knocked at
the door, whereupon he came out, and I saluted him, saying, “‘Tis
for time like this that friends are treasured up”; and he replied,
“With love and gladness! Come in you twain.” So we entered but
found money scarce with him: however, he gave me a kerchief,
saying, “Carry it to the bazar and sell it and buy food and what
else thou needest.” I took the handkerchief, and hastening to the
market, sold it and bought what we required of victuals and other
matters; but when I returned, I found that Muslim had retired
with her to an underground chamber.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2257" id="noteref-2257" epub:type="noteref">2257</a> When he heard my step
he hurried out and said to me, “Allah requite thee the kindness
thou hast done me, O Abu Ali and reward thee in time to come
and reckon it of thy good deeds on the Day of Doom!” So saying,
he took from me the food and wine and shut the door in my
face. His words enraged me and I knew not what to do; but he
stood behind the door, shaking for mirth; and, when he saw me
thus, he said to me, “I conjure thee on my life, O Abu Ali, tell
who it was composed this couplet?”—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I lay in her arms all night, leaving him ✿ To sleep foul-hearted but clean of staff.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>At this my rage redoubled, and I replied, “He who wrote this
other couplet”:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">One, I wish him in belt a thousand horns, ✿ Exceeding in mighty height Manáf.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2258" id="noteref-2258" epub:type="noteref">2258</a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>Then I began to abuse him and reproach him with the foulness of
his action and his lack of honour; and he was silent never uttering
a word. But, when I had finished, he smiled and said, “Out
on thee, O fool! Thou hast entered my house and sold my
kerchief and spent my silver: so, with whom art thou wroth, O
pimp?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2259" id="noteref-2259" epub:type="noteref">2259</a> Then he left me and went away to her, whilst I said,
“By Allah, thou art right to twit me as nincompoop and
pander!” Then I left his door and went away in sore concern,
and I feel its trace in my heart to this very day; for I never had
my will of her nor, indeed, ever heard of her more. And amongst
other tales is that about</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
