<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">INDEX.</h2>

<ul class="index c005">
  <li class="c017">Abárík (Al-), <em>pl.</em> of Ibrík, an ewer containing water for the Wuzu-ablution, <a href="#Page_170">170</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Abtál (<em>pl.</em> of Batal) = champions, athletes (<em>tr.</em> “braves”), <a href="#Page_42">42</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Abú al-Tawáif (<em>pron.</em> “Abut-tawáif”), the Father of the (Jinn-) tribes, <a href="#Page_84">84</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Abú Nowás (appearing in The Nights, a signal for an outburst of facetiæ), <a href="#Page_153">153</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Adab = accomplishments, <a href="#Page_68">68</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">’Adi = an enemy (<em>tr.</em> “foe”), <a href="#Page_14">14</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Afras = <em>lit.</em> a better horseman (<em>tr.</em> “doughtier”), <a href="#Page_105">105</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Ahbábu-ná <em>pl. for sing.</em> = my beloved (<em>tr.</em> “my friends”), <a href="#Page_103">103</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">’Akíl, first cousin of Mahommed, <a href="#Page_164">164</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Akwà min dahni’l-lauz = more strengthening than oil, <a href="#Page_75">75</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">’Alà kulli hál = “whatever may betide” or “willy nilly,” <a href="#Page_283">283</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">’Alam al-Din = “Flag of the Faith,” <a href="#Page_4">4</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Alaykum = “Peace be on you” (addressed to a single person), <a href="#Page_52">52</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">’Alkam = the bitter gourd, colocynth, <a href="#Page_218">218</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Allah, (“An alms, for the love of”), <a href="#Page_44">44</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">—— be the judge between me and thee, <a href="#Page_52">52</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">—— decreed of old, <a href="#Page_90">90</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">—— “Enter in the name of” = Bismillah, <a href="#Page_38">38</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">—— Gifted of, <a href="#Page_200">200</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">—— I look to, for aid, <a href="#Page_202">202</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">—— is All-great, <a href="#Page_125">125</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">—— “I seek refuge with” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, Allah forfend, <a href="#Page_9">9</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">—— made easy to me, <a href="#Page_53">53</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">—— Men, who resign themselves to = <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, Moslems who practice the Religion of Resignation, <a href="#Page_271">271</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Allah open to thee the door of subsistence, <a href="#Page_44">44</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">—— removed to the mercy of = he died, <a href="#Page_78">78</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">—— Take refuge with, from the Evil eye of her charms, <a href="#Page_245">245</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">—— This is the deposit of, then thy deposit = “I commit him to thy charge under God,” <a href="#Page_184">184</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">—— whom Allah save and assain, <a href="#Page_173">173</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Allah ya’tík = Allah will give it thee, not I, <a href="#Page_44">44</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“A mighty matter” may also mean “A masterful man” (reading Imraam = man for Amran = matter), <a href="#Page_204">204</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Amín al-Hukm = “Faithful of Command,” <a href="#Page_7">7</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">’Anbar (<em>tr.</em> “Ambergris”), <a href="#Page_67">67</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">’Anká (Al-) = <em>lit.</em> “The long-necked” (bird), <a href="#Page_128">128</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“Après moi le déluge,” <a href="#Page_123">123</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Arab lovers jealous of their mistresses’ nightly phantom, <a href="#Page_179">179</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Arab, of noble tribe, always first to mount his own mare, <a href="#Page_248">248</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Arja’ = <em>lit.</em> return (<em>tr.</em> “desist”), <a href="#Page_105">105</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Arzi-há = in its earth, its outlying suburbs (<em>tr.</em> “environs”), <a href="#Page_198">198</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Ashírah = clan, <a href="#Page_225">225</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">At her last breath, when cured by the magic of love, <a href="#Page_243">243</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Atwash (Al-) = one notable for levity of mind, <a href="#Page_16">16</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">A’zán-hú = <em>lit.</em> “its ears” (<em>tr.</em> “its pegs”), <a href="#Page_159">159</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Aznání = emaciated one, <a href="#Page_214">214</a>.</li>
  <li class="c005">Bahár = ox-eye herb, <a href="#Page_13">13</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Bakar (Ox) and Taur (Bull), Moslem emblems of stupidity, <a href="#Page_178">178</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Balass ruby = of rare wood set with rubies, <a href="#Page_251">251</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Balát = the flags (slabs of limestone and sandstone), <a href="#Page_21">21</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Baliyah = bane and bale (to jingle with “Bábiliyah”), <a href="#Page_153">153</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Banát al-hawá = <em>lit.</em> daughters of love (<em>tr.</em> “a merry girl”), <a href="#Page_137">137</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Banú Shaybán = the King’s own tribe, <a href="#Page_199">199</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Barári = deserts, <a href="#Page_16">16</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Barber, the usual operator in circumcision, <a href="#Page_116">116</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Bashkhánah (Al-) = the curtain, <a href="#Page_165">165</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Bathing after copulation kept up by both sexes in ancient Rome, <a href="#Page_142">142</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Bí-adabí = being without Adab (= rudeness, etc.), <a href="#Page_68">68</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Bibars (<em>pron.</em> “Baybars”), <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Bid’ah = <em>lit.</em> an innovation, a new thing (<em>tr.</em> “accursed custom”), <a href="#Page_266">266</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Bi jildi ’l-bakar = a cow hide, <a href="#Page_96">96</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“Bilád al-Maghrib (al-Aksa” in full) = the Farthest Land of the Setting Sun (<em>tr.</em> “Sundown-Land”), <a href="#Page_252">252</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Bishr and Hind (two well-known lovers), <a href="#Page_211">211</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“Bismillah” = Enter in the name of Allah, <a href="#Page_38">38</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“Bismillah; in the name of the Lord” = “Let us go,” etc., <a href="#Page_85">85</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Blackening faces a promise of Hell-fire, <a href="#Page_42">42</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Blood-feuds troublesome to travellers, <a href="#Page_222">222</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Bráhmani = Hindu, Indian, <a href="#Page_111">111</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Branchlet = a youth’s slender form, <a href="#Page_162">162</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Breslau Ed. quoted, <a href="#Page_3">3</a>, <a href="#Page_54">54</a>, <a href="#Page_55">55</a>, <a href="#Page_63">63</a>, <a href="#Page_67">67</a>, <a href="#Page_151">151</a>, <a href="#Page_183">183</a>, <a href="#Page_191">191</a>, <a href="#Page_259">259</a>, <a href="#Page_263">263</a>, <a href="#Page_275">275</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Bridegroom offers coffee and Halwá to friends after a “happy night,” <a href="#Page_142">142</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Brutality of a Moslem mob, <a href="#Page_168">168</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Bukhti = The Bactrian or double-humped dromedary, <a href="#Page_235">235</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Bunduki (adj. of Bunbuk) = Venetian, <a href="#Page_204">204</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Burka’ = the face veil of Egypt, etc., <a href="#Page_172">172</a>.</li>
  <li class="c005">Calcutta Edition quoted, <a href="#Page_137">137</a>, <a href="#Page_141">141</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Carrion, animals that died without beingceremonially killed, <a href="#Page_175">175</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Chamber, a dangerous word in English, <a href="#Page_129">129</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Chapter of the Cow (Koran), <a href="#Page_175">175</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Chess rarely played for money in Europe, <a href="#Page_205">205</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“Children” used for fighting men, <a href="#Page_224">224</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Circumcision, <a href="#Page_90">90</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Citadel of Lead = Capital of King Al-Shisban, <a href="#Page_117">117</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Couch of Circumcision, <a href="#Page_111">111</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Cranes of Ibycus, <a href="#Page_59">59</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“Cried out from her head” = Sang in tenor tones which are always in falsetto, <a href="#Page_238">238</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Crucifixion by nailing to an upright board, <a href="#Page_49">49</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Cup-companions = the professional Ráwis or tale reciters, <a href="#Page_266">266</a>.</li>
  <li class="c005">Dáhiyat al-Dawáhí = a calamity of the Calamities, <a href="#Page_119">119</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Dara’ or Dira’ = armour (<em>tr.</em> “jerkin”), <a href="#Page_209">209</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Darb = lit. a road (<em>tr.</em> “street”), <a href="#Page_8">8</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Daur al-Ká’ah = the opening made in the ceiling for light (<em>tr.</em> “the opening of the saloon”), <a href="#Page_23">23</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Dawát = ink-case (containing the reed-pens, etc.), <a href="#Page_211">211</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Daylam (Al-) prison, <a href="#Page_142">142</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Dayr al-Tin = “The Convent of Clay,” a Coptic monastery near Cairo, <a href="#Page_284">284</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Delights of Paradise promised by the Prophet, <a href="#Page_244">244</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Destiny, <a href="#Page_61">61</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Die thou and be thou an expiation for the shoe-latchet of Kulayb, <a href="#Page_263">263</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Dignity, permissible in royalty, affected by dames in Anglo-Egypt, <a href="#Page_110">110</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Dimity (<em>der.</em> from “Damietta”), <a href="#Page_210">210</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Divorce and marriage to Mahommed of the wife of Zayd (his adopted son), <a href="#Page_197">197</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“Dog or hog” = a Jew or a Christian, <a href="#Page_147">147</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Dromedaries the only animals used for sending messages over long distances, <a href="#Page_249">249</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Du’á = supplication, prayer as opposed to “Salát” = divine worship, <a href="#Page_94">94</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Dukhán = <em>lit.</em> smoke, <a href="#Page_126">126</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Dukhúlak = <em>lit.</em> thy entering (<em>tr.</em> “thy courtesy”), <a href="#Page_109">109</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Durráj (<em>tr.</em> Francolin), <a href="#Page_60">60</a>.</li>
  <li class="c005">Easterns startled by sudden summons to the presence of a king, <a href="#Page_210">210</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“Empty gourds,” Eastern succedaneum for swimming corks, <a href="#Page_286">286</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“Every one cannot go to Corinth,” <a href="#Page_74">74</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Exchange of salams a sign of safety, <a href="#Page_86">86</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Executioner, difficulty in Marocco about finding one who becomes obnoxious to the Thár or blood-feud, <a href="#Page_54">54</a>.</li>
  <li class="c005">Fajj = mountain pass (Spanish, Vega = also a mountain plain), <a href="#Page_117">117</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Falling backwards in laughter rare amongst the Badawin, <a href="#Page_202">202</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Farásah = <em>lit.</em> Knowing a horse (<em>tr.</em> “Visnomy”), <a href="#Page_96">96</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Farkalah (<span xml:lang="grc">φραγέλλιον</span>) = cattle whip, <a href="#Page_47">47</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Farkh Warak = a slip of paper, <a href="#Page_114">114</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Farsh = bed or straw-spread store room where apples are preserved, <a href="#Page_113">113</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Fawwák (chair of), <a href="#Page_72">72</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Fazl (Al-) the elder brother of Ja’afar, <a href="#Page_71">71</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Fityán (<em>pl.</em> of Fatà) = my fine fellows, <a href="#Page_42">42</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Flower = the breast, <a href="#Page_252">252</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Fumigating gugglets (with musk), <a href="#Page_275">275</a>.</li>
  <li class="c005">Gave her the hire of her going forth (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> Engaged her for a revel and paid her in advance), <a href="#Page_44">44</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Ghalílí = my yearning (<em>tr.</em> “my thirst”), <a href="#Page_102">102</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Gharbíyah (province in Egypt), <a href="#Page_16">16</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Ghattí = “Cover it up,” <a href="#Page_158">158</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Ghaur (or lowland) = the fall of the waist, <a href="#Page_252">252</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Ghuráb al-bayn = Raven of the wold or of parting, <a href="#Page_126">126</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Ghusl-ablution, <a href="#Page_20">20</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Giant Face (a parallel to the “Bodiless Head”), <a href="#Page_102">102</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Guest-fires, <a href="#Page_249">249</a>.</li>
  <li class="c005">Hæmorrhage stopped by plunging the stump into burning oil, <a href="#Page_168">168</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Hájib = eyebrow or chamberlain, <a href="#Page_252">252</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Haláwah = Sweetmeat, <a href="#Page_127">127</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Haláwat al-Miftáh = Sweetmeat of the Key-money (<em>tr.</em> “<em>douceur</em> of the Key”), <a href="#Page_20">20</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Halfah grass, <a href="#Page_46">46</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Hamd (Al-) = Allah-lauds, <a href="#Page_221">221</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Hamzah, uncle of Mahommed, <a href="#Page_164">164</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Hárát (or quarters) closed at night with strong wooden doors, <a href="#Page_9">9</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Harísah = meat pudding, <a href="#Page_277">277</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Hatif = an ally, <a href="#Page_234">234</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Hauráni = (native of Hauran), Job’s country, <a href="#Page_50">50</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Haykal (Ar. and Heb.) = a large space, a temple (<em>tr.</em> “hallowed fane”), <a href="#Page_175">175</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">He is of the lords of houses = folk of good family, <a href="#Page_169">169</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“Hell-flame but not shame,” <em>proverb</em>, <a href="#Page_148">148</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Hibá = dust.</li>
  <li class="c017">Hijáz (Al-) = The Moslem’s Holy Land, (Cap. Meccah), <a href="#Page_193">193</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Himà = the tribal domain (<em>tr.</em> “tribe-land”), <a href="#Page_215">215</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Hirfah = a trade, a guild, a corporation (<em>here</em> the officers of police), <a href="#Page_54">54</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“His eyes turned in his head” (to show the whites, as happens to the mesmerised), <a href="#Page_242">242</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Horse-thief chained to four pickets of iron, <a href="#Page_224">224</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">House of the Elephant (at chess) = the Castle’s square, <a href="#Page_205">205</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Hujjat = a legal deed (may also mean “an excuse”), <a href="#Page_27">27</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Husn tadbir = <em>lit.</em> “beauty of his contrivance” (<em>tr.</em> “Seemliness of his stratagem”), <a href="#Page_29">29</a>.</li>
  <li class="c005">I cannot fill my eye with the twain = cannot look at them long, <a href="#Page_88">88</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“I commit him to thy charge under God,” <a href="#Page_184">184</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“If his friend the Devil be overstrong for thee, flee him rather than be slain,” <a href="#Page_202">202</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">If my hand were changed = if my hand had lost its cunning, <a href="#Page_78">78</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“I have not any eye that can look at him” = “I cannot bear to see him,” <a href="#Page_110">110</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Ihramat li al-Salát = she pronounced the formula of Intention (Hiyat) (<em>tr.</em> “the Prohibition”), <a href="#Page_94">94</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Iklím = clime, <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">’Iláj (Al-) = insertion (<em>tr.</em> “horizontal refreshment”), <a href="#Page_185">185</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Imam = Antistes or fugleman at prayer who leads off the orisons, <a href="#Page_101">101</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Inscriptions on metal trays sold to Europeans (also on table-cloths), <a href="#Page_87">87</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Iraks (two) = Irák Arabí (Chaldæa) and ’Ajami (Western Persia), <a href="#Page_191">191</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">’Irk = vein (of our eye) <em>equiv. to</em> “the apple of the eye,” <a href="#Page_144">144</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Irregular use of inn, perpetuated in some monster hotels throughout Europe, <a href="#Page_20">20</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Irtiyád = a place where the urine spray may not defile the dress (<em>tr.</em> “a place to make water”), <a href="#Page_13">13</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Isaac of Mosul, the greatest of Arab Musicians, <a href="#Page_70">70</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">I smell the scent of the Jinn, <a href="#Page_125">125</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“I think not otherwise” = “I am quite sure,” <a href="#Page_119">119</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">I will lay down my life to save thee from sorrow—a common-place hyperbole of love, <a href="#Page_181">181</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">’Iyál-hu = <em>lit.</em> his family (<em>tr.</em> wives), <a href="#Page_8">8</a>.</li>
  <li class="c005">Jabal (Al-) al-Mukawwar = the Crescent Mountain (from Kaur = a park), <a href="#Page_119">119</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Jabhat = the lintel, opposed to the threshold (<em>tr. here</em> “‘forehead’ of his shop”), <a href="#Page_137">137</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Jamal fálij = the palsy-camel, <a href="#Page_235">235</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Jamrah = a bit of burning charcoal, <a href="#Page_122">122</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">—— = a live coal, <a href="#Page_87">87</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Jazírah = insula, Island, used in the sense of “peninsula,” <a href="#Page_220">220</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Jinns of Northern Europe, <a href="#Page_86">86</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Job (traditions of), <a href="#Page_50">50</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Julnár = Gulnare, <a href="#Page_100">100</a>.</li>
  <li class="c005">Kamariyah (<em>der. from</em> Kamar = Moon) = coloured glass windows, <a href="#Page_39">39</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Kásid = messenger, <a href="#Page_37">37</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Katl = killed (Irish “Kilt”), <a href="#Page_182">182</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“Kayásirah” (Cæsars) <em>opp. to</em> Akásirah, <a href="#Page_263">263</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Kayrawán = Curlew, <a href="#Page_93">93</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Kazi, ex-officio guardian of the orphans and their property, liable to punishment in case of fraud, <a href="#Page_10">10</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Khalíj (Al-), The Canal (Grand Canal of Cairo), <a href="#Page_286">286</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Khayr kathír = This is right good (also “abundant kindness”), <a href="#Page_275">275</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Khorasan (including our Afghanistan), in a chronic state of rebellion in Al-Rashid’s reign, <a href="#Page_167">167</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">King consummates his marriage in presence of his virgin sister-in-law, <a href="#Page_268">268</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">—— Kulayb (“little dog”) al-Wá’il, <a href="#Page_263">263</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">—— Nabhán, <a href="#Page_192">192</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">—— of the Kingdoms (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> of the worlds visible and invisible), <a href="#Page_6">6</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Kissing the hand, the action of a servant or slave, <a href="#Page_81">81</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Kitáb = book, written bond, <a href="#Page_27">27</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Koran quoted—
    <ul>
      <li>ii. 148, <a href="#Page_215">215</a>.</li>
      <li>ii. 168,   <a href="#Page_175">175</a>.</li>
      <li>xx. 30,   <a href="#Page_270">270</a>.</li>
      <li>xxxiii. 35,   <a href="#Page_271">271</a>.</li>
      <li>xxxiii. 38,   <a href="#Page_197">197</a>.</li>
      <li>xlvii. 16,   <a href="#Page_177">177</a>.</li>
      <li>lvi. 87, 88,   <a href="#Page_106">106</a>.</li>
      <li>cxiii., cxiv.,   <a href="#Page_101">101</a>.</li>
    </ul>
  </li>
  <li class="c005">La’alla = peradventure (used to express expectation of possible occurrence), <a href="#Page_20">20</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Laban = milk soured (<em>tr.</em> “curd”), <a href="#Page_54">54</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Lajlaj = tied (his tongue was), <a href="#Page_186">186</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">La-nakhsifanna = I would assuredly, etc., <a href="#Page_23">23</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Lane quoted, <a href="#Page_246">246</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Last march (to the next world), <a href="#Page_202">202</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Laysa fi ’l-diyári dayyár = “nor is there a wight in the site” (a favourite jingle), <a href="#Page_275">275</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Leather from Al-Táif, <a href="#Page_242">242</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Legal defects, (which justify returning a slave to the slave-dealer), <a href="#Page_141">141</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Lieutenant of the bench, <a href="#Page_24">24</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Lilláhi durrak = Gifted of Allah, <a href="#Page_200">200</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Lithám = the coquettish fold of transparent muslin used by women in Stambul, <a href="#Page_172">172</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Love (for “sleep”), <a href="#Page_164">164</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Lúlúah = The Pearl or Wild Heifer, <a href="#Page_95">95</a>.</li>
  <li class="c005">Maamún (Al-) al-Hákim b’Amri’llah = The Secure, the Ruler by Commandment of Allah, <a href="#Page_281">281</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Mabásim (<em>pl.</em> of Mabsim) = a smiling mouth, <a href="#Page_162">162</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Madmen in hot climates enjoy throwing off their clothes, <a href="#Page_22">22</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Majnún = “A madman,” <a href="#Page_22">22</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Making a picture (or statue), which artist cannot quicken, a process demanded on Doomsday, <a href="#Page_194">194</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Makrúh = blameable, not actually damnable, <a href="#Page_46">46</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Malláh (Al-) = the salting ground, <a href="#Page_54">54</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Malik (King), a title loosely applied in Arabic, <a href="#Page_191">191</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Mamrak, or small dome built over pavilions (also <em>Pers.</em> “Bádhanj”), <a href="#Page_82">82</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Mamrak = dome-shaped skylight, <a href="#Page_39">39</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Máriyah (Maria, Mary) a non-Moslem name, <a href="#Page_194">194</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Marj Salí = cleft meadow (here and below) <em>tr.</em> “Green Meadow,” <a href="#Page_227">227</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Maròcco, earliest occurrence of name, <a href="#Page_252">252</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Maut ahmar = violent or bloody death (<em>tr.</em> “red death,”) <a href="#Page_11">11</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Ma’úzatáni = The Two Preventives (two chapters from the Koran), <a href="#Page_101">101</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Mawálid (<em>pl.</em> of Maulid) = <em>lit.</em> “nativity festivals,” (<em>here</em> “funeral ceremonies”), <a href="#Page_187">187</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Mawázi (<em>pl.</em> of Mauza’) = <em>lit.</em> places, shifts (<em>tr.</em> “positions”), <a href="#Page_112">112</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">May God never requite thee for me with good (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> Damn your soul for leading me into this danger), <a href="#Page_39">39</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">May I not be bereft of these steps = may thy visits never fail me, <a href="#Page_110">110</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Meccah and Al-Medinah = The two Sanctuaries, <a href="#Page_220">220</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Merchants wear dagger and sword, <a href="#Page_38">38</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Mizwad (or Mizwád) = <em>lit.</em> provision bag, <a href="#Page_222">222</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Mohammed Ali Pasha (the “Great”), <a href="#Page_9">9</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">More cutting = more bewitching, <a href="#Page_143">143</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Morning and evening = day and night for ever, <a href="#Page_195">195</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Moslems think the more you see of them the more you like them, <a href="#Page_208">208</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Mu’ajjalah = money paid down before consummation, <a href="#Page_141">141</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Mu’ajjalah = coin paid contingent on divorce, <a href="#Page_141">141</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Mubáh = an action not sinful (<em>harám</em>) or quasi-sinful (<em>makrúh</em>) (<em>tr.</em> “lawfully”), <a href="#Page_12">12</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Muhattakát = usually “with torn veils,” metaphor meaning in disgrace (<em>tr.</em> “unveiled”), <a href="#Page_46">46</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Mu’ín al-Din = “Aider of the Faith,” <a href="#Page_5">5</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Mukaddam = Captain, <a href="#Page_7">7</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Mukhaddarát = maidens concealed behind curtains and veiled in the Harem, <a href="#Page_265">265</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Munír = “The brilliant,” the enlightened, <a href="#Page_100">100</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Musáfahah = clapping palm (of the hand), <a href="#Page_225">225</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Mustauda = strong box, <a href="#Page_9">9</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Mustaráh (Al-) = Chapel of Ease (a favourite haunting-place of the Jinn), <a href="#Page_85">85</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Mutahaddisín = novi homines, upstarts (<em>tr.</em> “of the number of the new,”) <a href="#Page_82">82</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Mutawallí = Prefect (of Police), <a href="#Page_30">30</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Muzfir (Al-) = the Twister, <a href="#Page_95">95</a>.</li>
  <li class="c005">Nadd, a compound perfume, <a href="#Page_108">108</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Nahnu = we (for I), <a href="#Page_28">28</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Náihah = the præfica or myriologist, <a href="#Page_171">171</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“Naked intercessor” (one who cannot be withstood), <a href="#Page_83">83</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Nasrín = moss-rose, <a href="#Page_115">115</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Nawwáb (<em>pl.</em> of Náib) = a Nabob (<em>tr. lit.</em> “deputies”), <a href="#Page_8">8</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Názilah = descent (of calamity), <a href="#Page_176">176</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Názir al-Mawáris = “Inspector of Inheritances,” <a href="#Page_286">286</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Necklace-pearls = the cup-bearer’s teeth, <a href="#Page_253">253</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Ni’am = Yes (an exception to the Abbé Sicard’s rule), <a href="#Page_19">19</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Night beset his back = darkened behind him, <a href="#Page_197">197</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Niká (<em>lit.</em> sand hill) = the swell of the throat, <a href="#Page_252">252</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Nún al-taakid = the N of injunction, <a href="#Page_23">23</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Nuzhat-í = pleasance, <a href="#Page_45">45</a>.</li>
  <li class="c005">Ocular testimony demanded by Moslem law, <a href="#Page_17">17</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Oil, anointing with, for incipient consumption, <a href="#Page_75">75</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“On my shop” = bit of boarding wherethe master sits, or on a stool in thestreet, <a href="#Page_281">281</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Orisons = the prayers of the last day andnight, <a href="#Page_94">94</a>.</li>
  <li class="c005">Palace between two rivers = In Rauzah-island, <a href="#Page_281">281</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Palace not the place for a religious andscrupulous woman, <a href="#Page_229">229</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Part and parts = more or less thoroughly, <a href="#Page_152">152</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Parturition and death easy compared withboth processes in the temperates of Europe, <a href="#Page_23">23</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Payne quoted, <a href="#Page_28">28</a>, <a href="#Page_54">54</a>, <a href="#Page_67">67</a>, <a href="#Page_73">73</a>, <a href="#Page_85">85</a>, <a href="#Page_110">110</a>, <a href="#Page_112">112</a>, <a href="#Page_154">154</a>, <a href="#Page_191">191</a>, <i><span xml:lang="la">ib.</span></i>, <a href="#Page_200">200</a>, <a href="#Page_227">227</a>, <a href="#Page_231">231</a>, <a href="#Page_248">248</a>, <a href="#Page_251">251</a>, <a href="#Page_267">267</a>, <a href="#Page_275">275</a>, <a href="#Page_281">281</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Perjury easily expiated amongst Moslems, <a href="#Page_38">38</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Pilgrimage quoted—
    <ul>
      <li>i. 62,  20</li>
      <li>i. 87,  71</li>
      <li>i. 100,  281</li>
      <li>i. 119,  54</li>
      <li>i. 127,  152</li>
      <li>i. 173,  9</li>
      <li>i. 321,  63</li>
      <li>i. 338,  220</li>
      <li>ii. 57,  <i><span xml:lang="la">ib.</span></i></li>
      <li>ii. 297,  222</li>
      <li>iii. 68,  59</li>
      <li>iii. 385,   22</li>
      <li>iii. 385,  51</li>
    </ul>
  </li>
  <li class="c017">“Plied him with wine,” a favourite habit with mediæval Arabs, <a href="#Page_50">50</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Poetry (Persian,) often alludes to the rose, etc., <a href="#Page_99">99</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Police (Eastern), <a href="#Page_6">6</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Professional singers, becoming freed women and turning “respectable,” <a href="#Page_254">254</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Pummel of the saddle, <a href="#Page_85">85</a>.</li>
  <li class="c005">Quarters, containing rooms in which girls are sold, <a href="#Page_71">71</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Queen Shu’á’ah = Queen Sunbeam, <a href="#Page_107">107</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“Quench that fire for him” (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> hush up the matter), <a href="#Page_15">15</a>.</li>
  <li class="c005">Raas Ghanam = a head of sheep (form of expressing singularity common to Arabic), <a href="#Page_207">207</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Raba’ = <em>lit.</em> spring quarters (<em>tr.</em> “a lodging house”), <a href="#Page_19">19</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Rasílah = a (she) partner (<em>tr.</em> “accompanyist”), <a href="#Page_44">44</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Rayhánah, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> the “Basil,” mostly a servile name, <a href="#Page_20">20</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Red Camel (Ahmar), <a href="#Page_248">248</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Rikkí al-Saut = soften the sound (or “lower thy voice”), <a href="#Page_89">89</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Rúhí = <em>lit.</em> my breath (<em>tr.</em> “my sprite”), <a href="#Page_120">120</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Rustaki, from Rustak, a quarter of Baghdah, <a href="#Page_209">209</a>.</li>
  <li class="c005">Saff Kamaríyát min al-Zujáj = glazed and coloured lunettes, <a href="#Page_39">39</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Sahbá = red wine, <a href="#Page_99">99</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Sáhils, or shore-lands, <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Sákiyah = water-wheel, <a href="#Page_47">47</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Sammár = reciters, <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Santír = psalteries, <a href="#Page_246">246</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Sat down (in sign of agitation), <a href="#Page_211">211</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Sawákí = channels, <a href="#Page_93">93</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Severance-spies = stars and planets, <a href="#Page_236">236</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Shahrazad and Shahryar, <a href="#Page_259">259</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Shaking his clothes (in sign of quitting possession), <a href="#Page_205">205</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Sharárah = a spark, <a href="#Page_87">87</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Sharí’at, forbidding divorce by compulsion, <a href="#Page_147">147</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Sharifí = a sequin, <a href="#Page_143">143</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Sharkíyah (province in Egypt), <a href="#Page_16">16</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Sharr fi al-Haramayn = wickedness in the two Holy Places, <a href="#Page_220">220</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Shawáhid (meaning that heart testifies to heart) <em>tr.</em> “hearts have their witnesses,” <a href="#Page_87">87</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Shaybání (Al-) = “Of the Shaybán tribe,” 191, <a href="#Page_199">199</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Shaykh al-Hujjáj = Shaykh of the Pilgrims, <a href="#Page_63">63</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“Shaykh al-Tawaif” may mean “Shaykh of the Tribes” (of Jinns), <a href="#Page_117">117</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Shayyan li ’lláh = <em>lit.</em> (Give me some) Thing for (the love of) Allah (<em>tr.</em> “An alms, for the love of Allah”), <a href="#Page_44">44</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Sházz = Voice (doubtful if girl’s, nightingale’s, or dove’s), <a href="#Page_244">244</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“She heard a blowing behind her” (a phenomena well known to spiritualists), <a href="#Page_101">101</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“She will double thy store of presents,” <a href="#Page_111">111</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Shuhbá (Al-) = Ash-coloured, verging upon white, <a href="#Page_110">110</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Sídí = “my lord” (here becomes part of a name), <a href="#Page_151">151</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Sijn al-Dam = the Prison of Blood, <a href="#Page_161">161</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Sim’án-son = son of Simeon, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> a Christian, <a href="#Page_175">175</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Singing and music blameable (Makrúh), though not actually damnable, <a href="#Page_46">46</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Sir fi hálik (<em>pron.</em> Sirfhák) = Go about thy business, <a href="#Page_44">44</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Sirr (a secret), afterwards Kitmán (concealment) = keeping a lover down-hearted, <a href="#Page_218">218</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Sitt al-Miláh = Lady or princess of the Fair (ones), <a href="#Page_155">155</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Slaves fond of talking over their sale, <a href="#Page_94">94</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Sons of Adam = his Moslem neighbours, <a href="#Page_30">30</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Sons of the Path = Travellers, Nomads, Wild Arabs, <a href="#Page_213">213</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“Son of the Road” = a mere passer-by, a stranger, <a href="#Page_235">235</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“Spoiling for a fight,” <a href="#Page_199">199</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“Squeezed my ribs,” a bear-like attack, common amongst lower orders of Egypt and Syria, <a href="#Page_47">47</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Sunnah and Farz = The practice (of the Prophet) and the Holy Law (Koranic), <a href="#Page_10">10</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Surah = Koranic chapter; here possibly clerical error for Súrah—sort (of food), <a href="#Page_173">173</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Súsan = the lily (in Heb.), <a href="#Page_116">116</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Swooper of the Jinn, <a href="#Page_202">202</a>.</li>
  <li class="c005">Táb = “tip-cat,” <a href="#Page_54">54</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Táf (Al-) a suburb of Baghdah, <a href="#Page_71">71</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Tahzíb = reforming morals, amending conduct, etc., <a href="#Page_240">240</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Talákan báyinan = a triple divorce before witnesses, <a href="#Page_148">148</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Tamkín = gravity, assurance (<em>tr.</em> “Self-possession”), <a href="#Page_8">8</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Tarfah = Tamarisk, <a href="#Page_252">252</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Tarjumán = a dragoman (<em>tr.</em> “Truchman”), <a href="#Page_185">185</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Thaghr al-Khánakah = The narrows of the (Dervishes’) convent, <a href="#Page_74">74</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Thieves with hands lopped off, <a href="#Page_44">44</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“Thine is ours and on thee shall be whatso is on us” = we will assume thy debts and responsibilities, <a href="#Page_247">247</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">This girl is a fat piece of meat (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> “There are good pickings to be had out of this job”), <a href="#Page_17">17</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Thiyáb ’Amúdiyah = striped clothes, <a href="#Page_79">79</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Those noble steps = thine auspicious visits, <a href="#Page_82">82</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Thou comest to bring us victory = “comest thou to our succour,” <a href="#Page_201">201</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Thrust his finger up his fundament (a diabolical way of clapping hands in applause), <a href="#Page_89">89</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">’Tis more acceptable to me than a red camel, <a href="#Page_248">248</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Tobbas = “Successors” or the Himyaritic Kings, <a href="#Page_263">263</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“To-day wine, and to-morrow business,” <a href="#Page_177">177</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Tohfah = a Choice Gift, <a href="#Page_79">79</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Tohfat al-Humaká = Choice Gift of the Fools, <a href="#Page_73">73</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Tohfat al-Kulúb = Choice Gift of the Hearts, <a href="#Page_73">73</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Tohfat al-Sudúr = Choice Gift of the Breasts (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> of the hearts), <a href="#Page_84">84</a>–<a href="#Page_133">133</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">True believer imitates sayings and doings of the Apostle, <a href="#Page_173">173</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Turkumániyah = Turcomanish (<em>tr.</em> “dragomanish”), <a href="#Page_191">191</a>.</li>
  <li class="c005">’Úd = primarily “wood”; then a “lute” (<em>tr.</em> here “fuel”), <a href="#Page_178">178</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">’Udúl (<em>pl.</em> of Ádil) = men of good repute (<em>tr.</em> “notables”), <a href="#Page_25">25</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">’Ummár = the Jinn (<em>tr.</em> “Haunters”), <a href="#Page_102">102</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">’Urkúb, a Jew of Yathrib, <a href="#Page_164">164</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">’Urs (Al-) w’al-Tuhúr = “the wedding (which does not drop out of the tale) and the circumcision,” <a href="#Page_90">90</a>.</li>
  <li class="c005">Veil me = protect my honour, <a href="#Page_147">147</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Veil (raiser of) means a fitting purchaser, <a href="#Page_73">73</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Violateth my private apartment, <a href="#Page_243">243</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Voice (mysterious), <a href="#Page_51">51</a>.</li>
  <li class="c005">Wakálah (Egyptian term for a Khan), <a href="#Page_153">153</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Wakhímah = an unhealthy land, <a href="#Page_87">87</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Where am I, and where is the daughter, etc.? = “What have I to do with, etc.,” <a href="#Page_7">7</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“Whoso journeyeth not enjoyeth not,” <a href="#Page_152">152</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“Whoso keeneth for himself is not like whoso is hired to keen.” <em>Proverb</em> = “If you want a thing done, etc.,” <a href="#Page_171">171</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Wine and Wassail, loose talk, etc., a favourite subject with lewd Moslems, <a href="#Page_34">34</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Wine, carrion and pork lawful to Moslem if used to save life, <a href="#Page_176">176</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“With love and gladness,” <a href="#Page_137">137</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Women, drowsy charms of, <a href="#Page_252">252</a>.</li>
  <li class="c005">Yad (Al-) al-bayzá = <em>lit.</em> The white hand (<em>tr.</em> “largesse”), <a href="#Page_123">123</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Yáfis bin Nuh = Japhet, son of Noah, <a href="#Page_111">111</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Yaftah’ Allah = Allah open (to thee the door of subsistence), <a href="#Page_44">44</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Yá Khawand = “O lord and master,” <a href="#Page_12">12</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Yá Mu’arras = O fool and disreputable (<em>tr.</em> “O pimp”), <a href="#Page_21">21</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Ya’tamidúna hudà-hum = purpose the right direction (<em>tr.</em> “those who seek their salvation”), <a href="#Page_32">32</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Yá Zínat al-Nisá = O adornment of womankind, <a href="#Page_207">207</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">“Ye are quit of,” etc. = You are welcome to it and so it becomes lawful (<em>halál</em>) to you, <a href="#Page_161">161</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Yúnus = Ibn Habíb, a friend of Isaac of Musul, <a href="#Page_71">71</a>.</li>
  <li class="c005">Za’amú = they opine, they declare (<em>tr.</em> “They set forth”), <a href="#Page_55">55</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Zabídún (here probably a clerical error for Zabíd, Capital of Tahámah), <a href="#Page_193">193</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Zafáir al-Jinn = Adiantum capillus Veneris, <a href="#Page_95">95</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Zalamah (Al-) = the policeman (<em>tr.</em> “men of violence”), <a href="#Page_52">52</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Zirtah = fart, <a href="#Page_56">56</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Zur ghibban, tazid hibban = visits rare keep friendship fair, <a href="#Page_209">209</a>.</li>
  <li class="c017">Zuwaylah Gate, <a href="#Page_8">8</a>.</li>
</ul>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
