<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Porter and the Three Ladies of Baghdad</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="volume-1" id="chapter-1-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="title">The Porter and the Three Ladies of Baghdad</h3>
			<p>Once upon a time there was a Porter in Baghdad, who was a bachelor and who would remain unmarried. It came to pass on a certain day, as he stood about the street leaning idly upon his crate, behold, there stood before him an honourable woman in a mantilla of Mosul<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-138" id="noteref-138" epub:type="noteref">138</a> silk, broidered with gold and bordered with brocade; her walking-shoes were also purfled with gold and her hair floated in long plaits. She raised her face-veil<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-139" id="noteref-139" epub:type="noteref">139</a> and, showing two black eyes fringed with jetty lashes, whose glances were soft and languishing and whose perfect beauty was ever blandishing, she accosted the Porter and said in the suavest tones and choicest language, “Take up thy crate and follow me.” The Porter was so dazzled he could hardly believe that he heard her aright, but he shouldered his basket in hot haste saying in himself, “O day of good luck! O day of Allah’s grace!” and walked after her till she stopped at the door of a house. There she rapped, and presently came out to her an old man, a Nazarene, to whom she gave a gold piece, receiving from him in return what she required of strained wine clear as olive oil; and she set it safely in the hamper, saying, “Lift and follow.” Quoth the Porter, “This, by Allah, is indeed an auspicious day, a day propitious for the granting of all a man wisheth.” He again hoisted up the crate and followed her; till she stopped at a fruiterer’s shop and bought from him Shámi<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-140" id="noteref-140" epub:type="noteref">140</a> apples and Osmáni quinces and Omani<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-141" id="noteref-141" epub:type="noteref">141</a> peaches, and cucumbers of Nile growth, and Egyptian limes and Sultáni oranges and citrons; besides Aleppine jasmine, scented myrtle berries, Damascene nenuphars, flower of privet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-142" id="noteref-142" epub:type="noteref">142</a> and camomile, blood-red anemones, violets, and pomegranate-bloom, eglantine and narcissus, and set the whole in the Porter’s crate, saying, “Up with it.” So he lifted and followed her till she stopped at a butcher’s booth and said, “Cut me off ten pounds of mutton.” She paid him his price and he wrapped it in a banana-leaf, whereupon she laid it in the crate and said “Hoist, O Porter.” He hoisted accordingly, and followed her as she walked on till she stopped at a grocer’s, where she bought dry fruits and pistachio-kernels, Tihámah raisins, shelled almonds and all wanted for dessert, and said to the Porter, “Lift and follow me.” So he up with his hamper and after her till she stayed at the confectioner’s, and she bought an earthen platter, and piled it with all kinds of sweetmeats in his shop, open-worked tarts and fritters scented with musk and “soap-cakes,” and lemon-loaves and melon-preserves,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-143" id="noteref-143" epub:type="noteref">143</a> and “Zaynab’s combs,” and “ladies’ fingers,” and “Kazi’s tit-bits” and goodies of every description; and placed the platter in the Porter’s crate. Thereupon quoth he (being a merry man), “Thou shouldest have told me, and I would have brought with me a pony or a she-camel to carry all this market-stuff.” She smiled and gave him a little cuff on the nape saying, “Step out and exceed not in words for (Allah willing!) thy wage will not be wanting.” Then she stopped at a perfumer’s and took from him ten sorts of waters, rose scented with musk, orange-flower, water-lily, willow flower, violet and five others; and she also bought two loaves of sugar, a bottle for perfume-spraying, a lump of male incense, aloe-wood, ambergris and musk, with candles of Alexandria wax; and she put the whole into the basket, saying, “Up with thy crate and after me.” He did so and followed until she stood before the greengrocer’s, of whom she bought pickled safflower and olives, in brine and in oil; with tarragon and cream-cheese and hard Syrian cheese; and she stowed them away in the crate saying to the Porter, “Take up thy basket and follow me.” He did so and went after her till she came to a fair mansion fronted by a spacious court, a tall, fine place to which columns gave strength and grace: and the gate thereof had two leaves of ebony inlaid with plates of red gold. The lady stopped at the door and, turning her face-veil sideways, knocked softly with her knuckles whilst the Porter stood behind her, thinking of naught save her beauty and loveliness. Presently the door swung back and both leaves were opened, whereupon he looked to see who had opened it; and behold, it was a lady of tall figure, some five feet high; a model of beauty and loveliness, brilliance and symmetry and perfect grace. Her forehead was flower-white; her cheeks like the anemone ruddy bright; her eyes were those of the wild heifer or the gazelle, with eyebrows like the crescent-moon which ends Shaʼabán and begins Ramazán;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-144" id="noteref-144" epub:type="noteref">144</a> her mouth was the ring of Sulayman,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-145" id="noteref-145" epub:type="noteref">145</a> her lips coral-red, and her teeth like a line of strung pearls or of camomile petals. Her throat recalled the antelope’s, and her breasts, like two pomegranates of even size, stood at bay as it were;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-146" id="noteref-146" epub:type="noteref">146</a> her body rose and fell in waves below her dress like the rolls of a piece of brocade, and her navel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-147" id="noteref-147" epub:type="noteref">147</a> would hold an ounce of benzoin ointment. In fine she was like her of whom the poet said:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>On Sun and Moon of palace cast thy sight ✿ Enjoy her flower-like face, her fragrant light:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine eyes shall never see in hair so black ✿ Beauty encase a brow so purely white:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ruddy rosy cheek proclaims her claim ✿ Though fail her name whose beauties we indite:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As sways her gait I smile at hips so big ✿ And weep to see the waist they bear so slight.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">When the Porter looked upon her his wits were waylaid, and his senses were stormed so that his crate went nigh to fall from his head, and he said to himself, “Never have I in my life seen a day more blessed than this day!” Then quoth the lady-portress to the lady-cateress, “Come in from the gate and relieve this poor man of his load.” So the provisioner went in followed by the portress and the Porter and went on till they reached a spacious ground-floor hall,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-148" id="noteref-148" epub:type="noteref">148</a> built with admirable skill and beautified with all manner colours and carvings; with upper balconies and groined arches and galleries and cupboards and recesses whose curtains hung before them. In the midst stood a great basin full of water surrounding a fine fountain, and at the upper end on the raised dais was a couch of juniper-wood set with gems and pearls, with a canopy like mosquito-curtains of red satin-silk looped up with pearls as big as filberts and bigger. Thereupon sat a lady bright of blee, with brow beaming brilliancy, the dream of philosophy, whose eyes were fraught with Babel’s gramarye<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-149" id="noteref-149" epub:type="noteref">149</a> and her eyebrows were arched as for archery; her breath breathed ambergris and perfumery and her lips were sugar to taste and carnelian to see. Her stature was straight as the letter ا<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-150" id="noteref-150" epub:type="noteref">150</a> and her face shamed the noon-sun’s radiancy; and she was even as a galaxy, or a dome with golden marquetry or a bride displayed in choicest finery or a noble maid of Araby.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-151" id="noteref-151" epub:type="noteref">151</a> Right well of her sang the bard when he said:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Her smiles twin rows of pearls display</span>
						<span>✿ Chamomile-buds or rimey spray</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Her tresses stray as night let down</span>
						<span>✿ And shames her light the dawn o’ day.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued"><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-152" id="noteref-152" epub:type="noteref">152</a> The third lady rising from the couch stepped forward with graceful swaying gait till she reached the middle of the saloon, when she said to her sisters, “Why stand ye here? take it down from this poor man’s head!” Then the cateress went and stood before him, and the portress behind him while the third helped them, and they lifted the load from the Porter’s head; and, emptying it of all that was therein, set everything in its place. Lastly they gave him two gold pieces, saying, “Wend thy ways, O Porter.” But he went not, for he stood looking at the ladies and admiring what uncommon beauty was theirs, and their pleasant manners and kindly dispositions (never had he seen goodlier); and he gazed wistfully at that good store of wines and sweet-scented flowers and fruits and other matters. Also he marvelled with exceeding marvel, especially to see no man in the place and delayed his going; whereupon quoth the eldest lady, “What aileth thee that goest not; haply thy wage be too little?” And, turning to her sister the cateress, she said, “Give him another dinar!” But the Porter answered, “By Allah, my lady, it is not for the wage; my hire is never more than two dirhams; but in very sooth my heart and my soul are taken up with you and your condition. I wonder to see you single with ne’er a man about you and not a soul to bear you company; and well you wot that the minaret toppleth o’er unless it stand upon four, and you want this same fourth; and women’s pleasure without man is short of measure, even as the poet said:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Seest not we want for joy four things all told ✿ The harp and lute, the flute and flageolet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be they companied with scents four-fold ✿ Rose, myrtle, anemone and violet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor please all eight an four thou wouldst withhold ✿ Good wine and youth and gold and pretty pet.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">You be three and want a fourth who shall be a person of good sense and prudence; smart witted, and one apt to keep careful counsel.” His words pleased and amused them much; and they laughed at him and said, “And who is to assure us of that? We are maidens and we fear to entrust our secret where it may not be kept, for we have read in a certain chronicle the lines of one Ibn al-Sumam:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Hold fast thy secret and to none unfold</span>
						<span>✿ Lost is a secret when that secret’s told:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>An fail thy breast thy secret to conceal</span>
						<span>✿ How canst thou hope another’s breast shall hold?</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">And Abu Nowás<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-153" id="noteref-153" epub:type="noteref">153</a> said well on the same subject:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Who trusteth secret to another’s hand ✿ Upon his brow deserveth burn of brand!”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">When the Porter heard their words he rejoined, “By your lives! I am a man of sense and a discreet, who hath read books and perused chronicles; I reveal the fair and conceal the foul and I act as the poet adviseth:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>None but the good a secret keep</span>
						<span>✿ And good men keep it unrevealed:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>It is to me a well-shut house</span>
						<span>✿ With keyless locks and door ensealed.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-154" id="noteref-154" epub:type="noteref">154</a></span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">When the maidens heard his verse and its poetical application addressed to them they said, “Thou knowest that we have laid out all our monies on this place. Now say, hast thou aught to offer us in return for entertainment? For surely we will not suffer thee to sit in our company and be our cup-companion, and gaze upon our faces so fair and so rare without paying a round sum.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-155" id="noteref-155" epub:type="noteref">155</a> Wottest thou not the saying:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Sans hope of gain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love’s not worth a grain?”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">Whereto the lady-portress added, “If thou bring anything thou art a something; if no thing, be off with thee, thou art a nothing;” but the procuratrix interposed, saying, “Nay, O my sisters, leave teasing him, for by Allah he hath not failed us this day, and had he been other he never had kept patience with me, so whatever be his shot and scot I will take it upon myself.” The Porter, overjoyed, kissed the ground before her and thanked her saying, “By Allah, these monies are the first fruits this day hath given me.” Hearing this they said, “Sit thee down and welcome to thee,” and the eldest lady added, “By Allah, we may not suffer thee to join us save on one condition, and this it is, that no questions be asked as to what concerneth thee not, and frowardness shall be soundly flogged.” Answered the Porter, “I agree to this, O my lady, on my head and my eyes be it! Lookye, I am dumb, I have no tongue.” Then arose the provisioneress and tightening her girdle set the table by the fountain and put the flowers and sweet herbs in their jars, and strained the wine and ranged the flasks in row and made ready every requisite. Then sat she down, she and her sisters, placing amidst them the Porter who kept deeming himself in a dream; and she took up the wine flagon, and poured out the first cup and drank it off, and likewise a second and a third.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-156" id="noteref-156" epub:type="noteref">156</a> After this she filled a fourth cup which she handed to one of her sisters; and, lastly, she crowned a goblet and passed it to the Porter, saying:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Drink the dear draught, drink free and fain ✿ What healeth every grief and pain.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">He took the cup in his hand and, louting low, returned his best thanks and improvised:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Drain not the bowl save with a trusty friend ✿ A man of worth whose good old blood all know:</span>
					<span>For wine, like wind, sucks sweetness from the sweet ✿ And stinks when over stench it haply blow:</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">Adding:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Drain not the bowl, save from dear hand like thine ✿ The cup recalls thy gifts; thou, gifts of wine.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">After repeating this couplet he kissed their hands and drank and was drunk and sat swaying from side to side and pursued:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>All drinks wherein is blood the Law unclean ✿ Doth hold save one, the bloodshed of the vine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fill! fill! take all my wealth bequeathed or won ✿ Thou fawn! a willing ransom for those eyne.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">Then the cateress crowned a cup and gave it to the portress, who took it from her hand and thanked her and drank. Thereupon she poured again and passed to the eldest lady who sat on the couch, and filled yet another and handed it to the Porter. He kissed the ground before them; and, after drinking and thanking them, he again began to recite:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Here! Here! by Allah, here!</span>
						<span>✿ Cups of the sweet, the dear!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Fill me a brimming bowl</span>
						<span>✿ The Fount o’ Life I speer</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">Then the Porter stood up before the mistress of the house and said, “O lady, I am thy slave, thy Mameluke, thy white thrall, thy very bondsman;” and he began reciting:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>A slave of slaves there standeth at thy door ✿ Lauding thy generous boons and gifts galore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beauty! may he come in awhile to ’joy ✿ Thy charms? for Love and I part nevermore!</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">She said to him, “Drink; and health and happiness attend thy drink.” So he took the cup and kissed her hand and recited these lines in sing-song:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>I gave her brave old wine that like her cheeks ✿ Blushed red or flame from furnace flaring up:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She bussed the brim and said with many a smile ✿ How durst thou deal folk’s cheek for folk to sup?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Drink!” (said I) “these are tears of mine whose tinct ✿ Is heart-blood sighs have boilèd in the cup.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">She answered him in the following couplet:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“An tears of blood for me, friend, thou hast shed ✿ Suffer me sup them, by thy head and eyes!”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">Then the lady took the cup, and drank it off to her sisters’ health, and they ceased not drinking (the Porter being in the midst of them), and dancing and laughing and reciting verses and singing ballads and ritornellos. All this time the Porter was carrying on with them, kissing, toying, biting, handling, groping, fingering; whilst one thrust a dainty morsel in his mouth, and another slapped him; and this cuffed his cheeks, and that threw sweet flowers at him; and he was in the very paradise of pleasure, as though he were sitting in the seventh sphere among the Houris<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-157" id="noteref-157" epub:type="noteref">157</a> of Heaven. They ceased not doing after this fashion until the wine played tricks in their heads and worsted their wits; and, when the drink got the better of them, the portress stood up and doffed her clothes till she was mother-naked. However, she let down her hair about her body by way of shift, and throwing herself into the basin disported herself and dived like a duck and swam up and down, and took water in her mouth, and spurted it all over the Porter, and washed her limbs, and between her breasts, and inside her thighs and all around her navel. Then she came up out of the cistern and throwing herself on the Porter’s lap said, “O my lord, O my love, what callest thou this article?” pointing to her slit, her solution of continuity. “I call that thy cleft,” quoth the Porter, and she rejoined, “Wah! wah! art thou not ashamed to use such a word?” and she caught him by the collar and soundly cuffed him. Said he again, “Thy womb, thy vulva;” and she struck him a second slap crying, “O fie, O fie, this is another ugly word; is there no shame in thee?” Quoth he, “Thy coynte;” and she cried, “O thou! art wholly destitute of modesty?” and thumped him and bashed him. Then cried the Porter, “Thy clitoris,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-158" id="noteref-158" epub:type="noteref">158</a> whereat the eldest lady came down upon him with a yet sorer beating, and said, “No;” and he said, “ ’Tis so,” and the Porter went on calling the same commodity by sundry other names, but whatever he said they beat him more and more till his neck ached and swelled with the blows he had gotten; and on this wise they made him a butt and a laughing-stock. At last he turned upon them asking, “And what do you women call this article?” Whereto the damsel made answer, “The basil of the bridges.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-159" id="noteref-159" epub:type="noteref">159</a> Cried the Porter, “Thank Allah for my safety: aid me and be thou propitious, O basil of the bridges!” They passed round the cup and tossed off the bowl again, when the second lady stood up; and, stripping off all her clothes, cast herself into the cistern and did as the first had done; then she came out of the water and throwing her naked form on the Porter’s lap pointed to her machine and said, “O light of mine eyes, do tell me what is the name of this concern?” He replied as before, “Thy slit;” and she rejoined, “Hath such term no shame for thee?” and cuffed him and buffeted him till the saloon rang with the blows. Then quoth she, “O fie! O fie! how canst thou say this without blushing?” He suggested, “The basil of the bridges;” but she would not have it and she said, “No! no!” and struck him and slapped him on the back of the neck. Then he began calling out all the names he knew, “Thy slit, thy womb, thy coynte, thy clitoris;” and the girls kept on saying, “No! no!” So he said, “I stick to the basil of the bridges;” and all the three laughed till they fell on their backs and laid slaps on his neck and said, “No! no! that’s not its proper name.” Thereupon he cried, “O my sisters, what <em>is</em> its name?” and they replied, “What sayest thou to the husked sesame-seed?” Then the cateress donned her clothes and they fell again to carousing, but the Porter kept moaning, “Oh! and Oh!” for his neck and shoulders, and the cup passed merrily round and round again for a full hour. After that time the eldest and handsomest lady stood up and stripped off her garments, whereupon the Porter took his neck in hand, and rubbed and shampoo’d it, saying, “My neck and shoulders are on the way of Allah!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-160" id="noteref-160" epub:type="noteref">160</a> Then she threw herself into the basin, and swam and dived, sported and washed; and the Porter looked at her naked figure as though she had been a slice of the moon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-161" id="noteref-161" epub:type="noteref">161</a> and at her face with the sheen of Luna when at full, or like the dawn when it brighteneth, and he noted her noble stature and shape, and those glorious forms that quivered as she went; for she was naked as the Lord made her. Then he cried “Alack! Alack!” and began to address her, versifying in these couplets:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“If I liken thy shape to the bough when green ✿ My likeness errs and I sore mistake it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the bough is fairest when clad the most ✿ And thou art fairest when mother-naked.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">When the lady heard his verses she came up out of the basin and, seating herself upon his lap and knees, pointed to her genitory and said, “O my lordling, what be the name of this?” Quoth he, “The basil of the bridges;” but she said, “Bah, bah!” Quoth he, “The husked sesame;” quoth she, “Pooh, pooh!” Then said he, “Thy womb;” and she cried, “Fie, Fie! art thou not ashamed of thyself?” and cuffed him on the nape of the neck. And whatever name he gave declaring “ ’Tis so,” she beat him and cried “No! no!” till at last he said, “O my sisters, and what <em>is</em> its name?” She replied, “It is entitled the Khan<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-162" id="noteref-162" epub:type="noteref">162</a> of Abu Mansur;” whereupon the Porter replied, “Ha! ha! O Allah be praised for safe deliverance! O Khan of Abu Mansur!” Then she came forth and dressed and the cup went round a full hour. At last the Porter rose up, and stripping off all his clothes, jumped into the tank and swam about and washed under his bearded chin and armpits, even as they had done. Then he came out and threw himself into the first lady’s lap and rested his arms upon the lap of the portress, and reposed his legs in the lap of the cateress and pointed to his prickle<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-163" id="noteref-163" epub:type="noteref">163</a> and said, “O my mistresses, what is the name of this article?” All laughed at his words till they fell on their backs, and one said, “Thy pintle!” But he replied, “No!” and gave each one of them a bite by way of forfeit. Then said they, “Thy pizzle!” but he cried “No,” and gave each of them a hug;⁠⸺⁠And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.</p>
			<p><span class="night-announcement">Now when it was the Tenth Night,</span> Quoth her sister Dunyazad, “Finish for us thy story;” and she answered, “With joy and goodly gree.” It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the damsels stinted not saying to the Porter “Thy prickle, thy pintle, thy pizzle,” and he ceased not kissing and biting and hugging until his heart was satisfied, and they laughed on till they could no more. At last one said, “O our brother, what, then, is it called?” Quoth he, “Know ye not?” Quoth they, “No!” “Its veritable name,” said he, “is mule Burst-all, which browseth on the basil of the bridges, and muncheth the husked sesame, and nighteth in the Khan of Abu Mansur.” Then laughed they till they fell on their backs, and returned to their carousal, and ceased not to be after this fashion till night began to fall. Thereupon said they to the Porter, “Bismillah,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-164" id="noteref-164" epub:type="noteref">164</a> O our master, up and on with those sorry old shoes of thine and turn thy face and show us the breadth of thy shoulders!” Said he, “By Allah, to part with my soul would be easier for me than departing from you: come let us join night to day, and to-morrow morning we will each wend our own way.” “My life on you,” said the procuratrix, “suffer him to tarry with us, that we may laugh at him: we may live out our lives and never meet with his like, for surely he is a right merry rogue and a witty.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-165" id="noteref-165" epub:type="noteref">165</a> So they said, “Thou must not remain with us this night save on condition that thou submit to our commands, and that whatso thou seest, thou ask no questions thereanent, nor enquire of its cause.” “All right,” rejoined he, and they said, “Go read the writing over the door.” So he rose and went to the entrance and there found written in letters of gold wash; “<strong>Whoso speaketh of what concerneth him not, shall hear what pleaseth him not!</strong>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-166" id="noteref-166" epub:type="noteref">166</a> The Porter said, “Be ye witnesses against me that I will not speak on whatso concerneth me not.” Then the cateress arose, and set food before them and they ate; after which they changed their drinking-place for another, and she lighted the lamps and candles and burned ambergris and aloes-wood, and set on fresh fruit and the wine service, when they fell to carousing and talking of their lovers. And they ceased not to eat and drink and chat, nibbling dry fruits and laughing and playing tricks for the space of a full hour when lo! a knock was heard at the gate. The knocking in no wise disturbed the seance, but one of them rose and went to see what it was and presently returned, saying, “Truly our pleasure for this night is to be perfect.” “How is that?” asked they; and she answered, “At the gate be three Persian Kalandars<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-167" id="noteref-167" epub:type="noteref">167</a> with their beards and heads and eyebrows shaven; and all three blind of the left eye⁠—which is surely a strange chance. They are foreigners from Roum-land with the mark of travel plain upon them; they have just entered Baghdad, this being their first visit to our city; and the cause of their knocking at our door is simply because they cannot find a lodging. Indeed one of them said to me:⁠—Haply the owner of this mansion will let us have the key of his stable or some old outhouse wherein we may pass this night; for evening had surprised them and, being strangers in the land, they knew none who would give them shelter. And, O my sisters, each of them is a figure o’ fun after his own fashion; and if we let them in we shall have matter to make sport of.” She gave not over persuading them till they said to her, “Let them in, and make thou the usual condition with them that they speak not of what concerneth them not, lest they hear what pleaseth them not.” So she rejoiced and going to the door presently returned with the three monoculars whose beards and mustachios were clean shaven.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-168" id="noteref-168" epub:type="noteref">168</a> They salam’d and stood afar off by way of respect; but the three ladies rose up to them and welcomed them and wished them joy of their safe arrival and made them sit down. The Kalandars looked at the room and saw that it was a pleasant place, clean swept and garnished with flowers; and the lamps were burning and the smoke of perfumes was spiring in air; and beside the dessert and fruits and wine, there were three fair girls who might be maidens; so they exclaimed with one voice, “By Allah, ’tis good!” Then they turned to the Porter and saw that he was a merry-faced wight, albeit he was by no means sober and was sore after his slappings. So they thought that he was one of themselves and said, “A mendicant like us! whether Arab or foreigner.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-169" id="noteref-169" epub:type="noteref">169</a> But when the Porter heard these words, he rose up, and fixing his eyes fiercely upon them, said, “Sit ye here without exceeding in talk! Have you not read what is writ over the door? surely it befitteth not fellows who come to us like paupers to wag your tongues at us.” “We crave thy pardon, O Fakír,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-170" id="noteref-170" epub:type="noteref">170</a> rejoined they, “and our heads are between thy hands.” The ladies laughed consumedly at the squabble; and, making peace between the Kalandars and the Porter, seated the new guests before meat and they ate. Then they sat together, and the portress served them with drink; and, as the cup went round merrily, quoth the Porter to the askers, “And you, O brothers mine, have ye no story or rare adventure to amuse us withal?” Now the warmth of wine having mounted to their heads they called for musical instruments; and the portress brought them a tambourine of Mosul, and a lute of Irák, and a Persian harp; and each mendicant took one and tuned it; this the tambourine and those the lute and the harp, and struck up a merry tune while the ladies sang so lustily that there was a great noise.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-171" id="noteref-171" epub:type="noteref">171</a> And whilst they were carrying on, behold, some one knocked at the gate, and the portress went to see what was the matter there. Now the cause of that knocking, O King (quoth Shahrazad) was this, the Caliph, Hárún al-Rashíd, had gone forth from the palace, as was his wont now and then, to solace himself in the city that night, and to see and hear what new thing was stirring; he was in merchant’s gear, and he was attended by Jaʼafar, his Wazir, and by Masrúr his Sworder of Vengeance.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-172" id="noteref-172" epub:type="noteref">172</a> As they walked about the city, their way led them towards the house of the three ladies; where they heard the loud noise of musical instruments and singing and merriment; so quoth the Caliph to Jaʼafar, “I long to enter this house and hear those songs and see who sing them.” Quoth Jaʼafar, “O Prince of the Faithful; these folk are surely drunken with wine, and I fear some mischief betide us if we get amongst them.” “There is no help but that I go in there,” replied the Caliph, “and I desire thee to contrive some pretext for our appearing among them.” Jaʼafar replied, “I hear and I obey;”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-173" id="noteref-173" epub:type="noteref">173</a> and knocked at the door, whereupon the portress came out and opened. Then Jaʼafar came forward and kissing the ground before her said, “O my lady, we be merchants from Tiberias-town: we arrived at Baghdad ten days ago; and, alighting at the merchants’ caravanserai, we sold all our merchandise. Now a certain trader invited us to an entertainment this night; so we went to his house and he set food before us and we ate: then we sat at wine and wassail with him for an hour or so when he gave us leave to depart; and we went out from him in the shadow of the night and, being strangers, we could not find our way back to our Khan. So haply of your kindness and courtesy you will suffer us to tarry with you this night, and Heaven will reward you!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-174" id="noteref-174" epub:type="noteref">174</a> The portress looked upon them and seeing them dressed like merchants and men of grave looks and solid, she returned to her sisters and repeated to them Jaʼafar’s story; and they took compassion upon the strangers and said to her, “Let them enter.” She opened the door to them, when said they to her, “Have we thy leave to come in?” “Come in,” quoth she; and the Caliph entered followed by Jaʼafar and Masrur; and when the girls saw them they stood up to them in respect and made them sit down and looked to their wants, saying, “Welcome, and well come and good cheer to the guests, but with one condition!” “What is that?” asked they, and one of the ladies answered, “Speak not of what concerneth you not, lest ye hear what pleaseth you not.” “Even so,” said they; and sat down to their wine and drank deep. Presently the Caliph looked on the three Kalandars and, seeing them each and every blind of the left eye, wondered at the sight; then he gazed upon the girls and he was startled and he marvelled with exceeding marvel at their beauty and loveliness. They continued to carouse and to converse and said to the Caliph, “Drink!” but he replied, “I am vowed to Pilgrimage;”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-175" id="noteref-175" epub:type="noteref">175</a> and drew back from the wine. Thereupon the portress rose and spreading before him a table-cloth worked with gold, set thereon a porcelain bowl into which she poured willow flower water with a lump of snow and a spoonful of sugar-candy. The Caliph thanked her and said in himself, “By Allah, I will recompense her to-morrow for the kind deed she hath done.” The others again addressed themselves to conversing and carousing; and, when the wine gat the better of them, the eldest lady who ruled the house rose and making obeisance to them took the cateress by the hand, and said, “Rise, O my sister and let us do what is our devoir.” Both answered “Even so!” Then the portress stood up and proceeded to remove the table-service and the remnants of the banquet; and renewed the pastiles and cleared the middle of the saloon. Then she made the Kalandars sit upon a sofa at the side of the estrade, and seated the Caliph and Jaʼafar and Masrur on the other side of the saloon; after which she called the Porter, and said, “How scant is thy courtesy! now thou art no stranger; nay, thou art one of the household.” So he stood up and, tightening his waist-cloth, asked, “What would ye I do?” and she answered, “Stand in thy place.” Then the procuratrix rose and set in the midst of the saloon a low chair and, opening a closet, cried to the Porter, “Come help me,” So he went to help her and saw two black bitches with chains round their necks; and she said to him, “Take hold of them;” and he took them and led them into the middle of the saloon. Then the lady of the house arose and tucked up her sleeves above her wrists and, seizing a scourge, said to the Porter, “Bring forward one of the bitches.” He brought, her forward, dragging her by the chain, while the bitch wept, and shook her head at the lady who, however, came down upon her with blows on the sconce; and the bitch howled and the lady ceased not beating her till her forearm failed her. Then, casting the scourge from her hand, she pressed the bitch to her bosom and, wiping away her tears with her hands, kissed her head. Then said she to the Porter, “Take her away and bring the second;” and, when he brought her, she did with her as she had done with the first. Now the heart of the Caliph was touched at these cruel doings; his chest straitened and he lost all patience in his desire to know why the two bitches were so beaten. He threw a wink at Jaʼafar wishing him to ask, but the Minister turning towards him said by signs, “Be silent!” Then quoth the portress to the mistress of the house, “O my lady, arise and go to thy place that I in turn may do my devoir.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-176" id="noteref-176" epub:type="noteref">176</a> She answered, “Even so”; and, taking her seat upon the couch of juniper-wood, pargetted with, gold and silver, said to the portress and cateress, “Now do ye what ye have to do.” Thereupon the portress sat upon a low seat by the couch side; but the procuratrix, entering a closet, brought out of it a bag of satin with green fringes and two tassels of gold. She stood up before the lady of the house and shaking the bag drew out from it a lute which she tuned by tightening its pegs; and when it was in perfect order, she began to sing these quatrains:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>Ye are the wish, the aim of me</span>
						<span>✿ And when, O love, thy sight I see<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-177" id="noteref-177" epub:type="noteref">177</a></span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The heavenly mansion openeth;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-178" id="noteref-178" epub:type="noteref">178</a></span>
						<span>✿ But Hell I see when lost thy sight.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>From thee comes madness; nor the less</span>
						<span>✿ Comes highest joy, comes ecstasy:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Nor in my love for thee I fear</span>
						<span>✿ Or shame and blame, or hate and spite.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>When Love was throned within my heart</span>
						<span>✿ I rent the veil of modesty;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And stints not Love to rend that veil</span>
						<span>✿ Garring disgrace on grace to alight;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The robe of sickness then I donned</span>
						<span>✿ But rent to rags was secrecy:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Wherefore my love and longing heart</span>
						<span>✿ Proclaim your high supremest might;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The tear-drop railing adown my cheek</span>
						<span>✿ Telleth my tale of ignomy:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>And all the hid was seen by all</span>
						<span>✿ And all my riddle ree’d aright.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Heal then my malady, for thou</span>
						<span>✿ Art malady and remedy!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>But she whose cure is in thy hand</span>
						<span>✿ Shall ne’er be free of bane and blight;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Burn me those eyne that radiance rain</span>
						<span>✿ Slay me the swords of phantasy;</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>How many hath the sword of Love</span>
						<span>✿ Laid low, their high degree despite?</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yet will I never cease to pine</span>
						<span>✿ Nor to oblivion will I flee.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Love is my health, my faith, my joy</span>
						<span>✿ Public and private, wrong or right.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>O happy eyes that sight thy charms</span>
						<span>✿ That gaze upon thee at their gree!</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Yea, of my purest wish and will</span>
						<span>✿ The slave of Love I’ll aye be hight.</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">When the damsel heard this elegy in quatrains she cried out “Alas! Alas!” and rent her raiment, and fell to the ground fainting; and the Caliph saw scars of the palm-rod<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-179" id="noteref-179" epub:type="noteref">179</a> on her back and welts of the whip; and marvelled with exceeding wonder. Then the portress arose and sprinkled water on her and brought her a fresh and very fine dress and put it on her. But when the company beheld these doings their minds were troubled, for they had no inkling of the case nor knew the story thereof; so the Caliph said to Jaʼafar, “Didst thou not see the scars upon the damsel’s body? I cannot keep silence or be at rest till I learn the truth of her condition and the story of this other maiden and the secret of the two black bitches.” But Jaʼafar answered, “O our lord, they made it a condition with us that we speak not of what concerneth us not, lest we come to hear what pleaseth us not.” Then said the portress, “By Allah, O my sister, come to me and complete this service for me.” Replied the procuratrix, “With joy and goodly gree;” so she took the lute; and leaned it against her breasts and swept the strings with her finger-tips, and began singing:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Give back mine eyes their sleep long ravishèd ✿ And say me whither be my reason fled:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I learnt that lending to thy love a place ✿ Sleep to mine eyelids mortal foe was made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They said, “We held thee righteous, who waylaid ✿ Thy soul?” “Go ask his glorious eyes,” I said.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pardon all my blood he pleased to spill ✿ Owning his troubles drove him blood to shed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On my mind’s mirror sun-like sheen he cast ✿ Whose keen reflection fire in vitals bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waters of Life let Allah waste at will ✿ Suffice my wage those lips of dewy red:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An thou address my love thou’lt find a cause ✿ For plaint and tears or ruth or lustihed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In water pure his form shall greet your eyne ✿ When fails the bowl nor need ye drink of wine.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-180" id="noteref-180" epub:type="noteref">180</a></span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">Then she quoted from the same ode:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>I drank, but the draught of his glance, not wine;</span>
						<span>✿ And his swaying gait swayed to sleep these eyne:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>’Twas not grape-juice gript me but grasp of Past</span>
						<span>✿ ’Twas not bowl o’erbowled me but gifts divine:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>His coiling curl-lets my soul ennetted</span>
						<span>✿ And his cruel will all my wits outwitted.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-181" id="noteref-181" epub:type="noteref">181</a></span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">After a pause she resumed:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>If we ’plain of absence what shall we say? ✿ Or if pain afflict us where wend our way?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An I hire a truchman<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-182" id="noteref-182" epub:type="noteref">182</a> to tell my tale ✿ The lovers’ plaint is not told for pay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I put on patience, a lover’s life ✿ After loss of love will not last a day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Naught is left me now but regret, repine ✿ And tears flooding cheeks for ever and aye:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O thou who the babes of these eyes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-183" id="noteref-183" epub:type="noteref">183</a> hast fled ✿ Thou art homed in heart that shall never stray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would heaven I wot hast thou kept our pact ✿ Long as stream shall flow, to have firmest fay?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or hast forgotten the weeping slave ✿ Whom groans afflict and whom griefs waylay?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, when severance ends and we side by side ✿ Couch, I’ll blame thy rigours and chide thy pride!</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">Now when the portress heard her second ode she shrieked aloud and said, “By Allah! ’tis right good!”; and laying hands on her garments tore them, as she did the first time, and fell to the ground fainting. Thereupon the procuratrix rose and brought her a second change of clothes after she had sprinkled water on her. She recovered and sat upright and said to her sister the cateress, “Onwards, and help me in my duty, for there remains but this one song.” So the provisioneress again brought out the lute and began to sing these verses:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>How long shall last, how long this rigour rife of woe ✿ May not suffice thee all these tears thou seest flow?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our parting thus with purpose fell thou dost prolong ✿ Is’t not enough to glad the heart of envious foe?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were but this lying world once true to lover-heart ✿ He had not watched the weary night in tears of woe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh pity me whom overwhelmed thy cruel will ✿ My lord, my king, ’tis time some ruth to me thou show:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom reveal my wrongs, O thou who murdered me? ✿ Sad, who of broken troth the pangs must undergo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Increase wild love for thee and phrenzy hour by hour ✿ And days of exile minute by so long, so slow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Moslems, claim <i xml:lang="it">vendetta</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-184" id="noteref-184" epub:type="noteref">184</a> for this slave of Love ✿ Whose sleep Love ever wastes, whose patience Love lays low:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doth law of Love allow thee, O my wish! to lie ✿ Lapt in another’s arms and unto me cry “Go!”?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet in thy presence, say, what joys shall I enjoy ✿ When he I love but works my love to overthrow?</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">When the portress heard the third song she cried aloud; and, laying hands on her garments, rent them down to the very skirt and fell to the ground fainting a third time, again showing the scars of the scourge. Then said the three Kalandars, “Would Heaven we had never entered this house, but had rather nighted on the mounds and heaps outside the city! for verily our visit hath been troubled by sights which cut to the heart.” The Caliph turned to them and asked, “Why so?” and they made answer, “Our minds are sore troubled by this matter.” Quoth the Caliph, “Are ye not of the household?” and quoth they, “No; nor indeed did we ever set eyes on the place till within this hour.” Hereat the Caliph marvelled and rejoined, “This man who sitteth by you, would he not know the secret of the matter?” and so saying he winked and made signs at the Porter. So they questioned the man but he replied, “By the All-might of Allah, in love all are alike!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-185" id="noteref-185" epub:type="noteref">185</a> I am the growth of Baghdad, yet never in my born days did I darken these doors till to-day and my companying with them was a curious matter.” “By Allah,” they rejoined, “we took thee for one of them and now we see thou art one like ourselves.” Then said the Caliph, “We be seven men, and they only three women without even a fourth to help them; so let us question them of their case; and, if they answer us not, fain we will be answered by force.” All of them agreed to this except Jaʼafar who said,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-186" id="noteref-186" epub:type="noteref">186</a> “This is not my recking; let them be; for we are their guests and, as ye know, they made a compact and condition with us which we accepted and promised to keep: wherefore it is better that we be silent concerning this matter; and, as but little of the night remaineth, let each and every of us gang his own gait.” Then he winked at the Caliph and whispered to him, “There is but one hour of darkness left and I can bring them before thee to-morrow, when thou canst freely question them all concerning their story.” But the Caliph raised his head haughtily and cried out at him in wrath, saying, “I have no patience left for my longing to hear of them: let the Kalandars question them forthright.” Quoth Jaʼafar, “This is not my rede.” Then words ran high and talk answered talk; and they disputed as to who should first put the question, but at last all fixed upon the Porter. And as the jangle increased the house-mistress could not but notice it and asked them, “O ye folk! on what matter are ye talking so loudly?” Then the Porter stood up respectfully before her and said, “O my lady, this company earnestly desire that thou acquaint them with the story of the two bitches and what maketh thee punish them so cruelly; and then thou fallest to weeping over them and kissing them; and lastly they want to hear the tale of thy sister and why she hath been bastinado’d with palm-sticks like a man. These are the questions they charge me to put, and peace be with thee.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-187" id="noteref-187" epub:type="noteref">187</a> Thereupon quoth she who was the lady of the house to the guests, “Is this true that he saith on your part?” and all replied, “Yes!” save Jaʼafar who kept silence. When she heard these words she cried, “By Allah, ye have wronged us, O our guests, with grievous wronging; for when you came before us we made compact and condition with you, that whoso should speak of what concerneth him not should hear what pleaseth him not. Sufficeth ye not that we took you into our house and fed you with our best food? But the fault is not so much yours as hers who let you in.” Then she tucked up her sleeves from her wrists and struck the floor thrice with her hand crying, “Come ye quickly;” and lo! a closet door opened and out of it came seven negro slaves with drawn swords in hand to whom she said, “Pinion me those praters’ elbows and bind them each to each.” They did her bidding and asked her, “O veiled and virtuous! is it thy high command that we strike off their heads?”; but she answered, “Leave them awhile that I question them of their condition, before their necks feel the sword.” “By Allah, O my lady!” cried the Porter, “slay me not for other’s sin; all these men offended and deserve the penalty of crime save myself. Now by Allah, our night had been charming had we escaped the mortification of those monocular Kalandars whose entrance into a populous city would convert it into a howling wilderness.” Then he repeated these verses:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>How fair is ruth the strong man deigns not smother! ✿ And fairest fair when shown to weakest brother:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Love’s own holy tie between us twain, ✿ Let one not suffer for the sin of other.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">When the Porter ended his verse the lady laughed⁠—And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.</p>
			<p><span class="night-announcement">Now when it was the Eleventh Night,</span> She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the lady, after laughing at the Porter despite her wrath, came up to the party and spake thus, “Tell me who ye be, for ye have but an hour of life; and were ye not men of rank and, perhaps, notables of your tribes, you had not been so froward and I had hastened your doom.” Then said the Caliph, “Woe to thee, O Jaʼafar, tell her who we are lest we be slain by mistake; and speak her fair before some horror befal us.” “ ’Tis part of thy deserts,” replied he; whereupon the Caliph cried out at him saying, “There is a time for witty words and there is a time for serious work.” Then the lady accosted the three Kalandars and asked them, “Are ye brothers?”; when they answered, “No, by Allah, we be naught but Fakirs and foreigners.” Then quoth she to one among them, “Wast thou born blind of one eye?”; and quoth he, “No, by Allah, ’twas a marvellous matter and a wondrous mischance which caused my eye to be torn out, and mine is a tale which, if it were written upon the eye-corners with needle-gravers, were a warner to whoso would be warned.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-188" id="noteref-188" epub:type="noteref">188</a> She questioned the second and third Kalandar; but all replied like the first, “By Allah, O our mistress, each one of us cometh from a different country, and we are all three the sons of Kings, sovereign Princes ruling over suzerains and capital cities.” Thereupon she turned towards them and said, “Let each and every of you tell me his tale in due order and explain the cause of his coming to our place; and if his story please us let him stroke his head<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-189" id="noteref-189" epub:type="noteref">189</a> and wend his way.” The first to come forward was the Hammál, the Porter, who said, “O my lady, I am a man and a porter. This dame, the cateress, hired me to carry a load and took me first to the shop of a vintner; then to the booth of a butcher; thence to the stall of a fruiterer; thence to a grocer who also sold dry fruits; thence to a confectioner and a perfumer-cum-druggist and from him to this place where there happened to me with you what happened. Such is my story and peace be on us all!” At this the lady laughed and said, “Rub thy head and wend thy ways!”; but he cried, “By Allah, I will not stump it till I hear the stories of my companions.” Then came forward one of the Monoculars and began to tell her</p>
			<section id="chapter-1-4-1" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h4 epub:type="title">The First Kalandar’s Tale</h4>
				<p>Know, O my lady, that the cause of my beard being shorn and my eye being out-torn was as follows. My father was a King and he had a brother who was a King over another city; and it came to pass that I and my cousin, the son of my paternal uncle, were· both born on one and the same day. And years and days rolled on; and, as we grew up, I used to visit my uncle every now and then and to spend a certain number of months with him. Now my cousin and I were sworn friends; for he ever entreated me with exceeding kindness; he killed for me the fattest sheep and strained the best of his wines, and we enjoyed long conversing and carousing. One day when the wine had gotten the better of us, the son of my uncle said to me, “O my cousin, I have a great service to ask of thee; and I desire that thou stay me not in whatso I desire to do!” And I replied, “With joy and goodly will.” Then he made me swear the most binding oaths and left me; but after a little while he returned leading a lady veiled and richly apparelled with ornaments worth a large sum of money. Presently he turned to me (the woman being still behind him) and said, “Take this lady with thee and go before me to such a burial ground” (describing it, so that I knew the place), “and enter with her into such a sepulchre<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-190" id="noteref-190" epub:type="noteref">190</a> and there await my coming.” The oaths I swore to him made me keep silence and suffered me not to oppose him; so I led the woman to the cemetery and both I and she took our seats in the sepulchre; and hardly had we sat down when in came my uncle’s son, with a bowl of water, a bag of mortar and an adze somewhat like a hoe. He went straight to the tomb in the midst of the sepulchre and, breaking it open with the adze set the stones on one side; then he fell to digging into the earth of the tomb till he came upon a large iron plate, the size of a wicket-door; and on raising it there appeared below it a staircase vaulted and winding. Then he turned to the lady and said to her, “Come now and take thy final choice!” She at once went down by the staircase and disappeared; then quoth he to me, “O son of my uncle, by way of completing thy kindness, when I shall have descended into this place, restore the trap-door to where it was, and heap back the earth upon it as it lay before; and then of thy great goodness mix this unslaked lime which is in the bag with this water which is in the bowl and, after building up the stones, plaster the outside so that none looking upon it shall say:⁠—This is a new opening in an old tomb. For a whole year have I worked at this place whereof none knoweth but Allah, and this is the need I have of thee;” presently adding, “May Allah never bereave thy friends of thee nor make them desolate by thine absence, O son of my uncle, O my dear cousin!” And he went down the stairs and disappeared for ever. When he was lost to sight I replaced the iron plate and did all his bidding till the tomb became as it was before; and I worked almost unconsciously for my head was heated with wine. Returning to the palace of my uncle, I was told that he had gone forth a-sporting and hunting; so I slept that night without seeing him; and, when the morning dawned, I remembered the scenes of the past evening and what happened between me and my cousin; I repented of having obeyed him when penitence was of no avail, I still thought, however, that it was a dream. So I fell to asking for the son of my uncle; but there was none to answer me concerning him; and I went out to the grave-yard and the sepulchres, and sought for the tomb under which he was, but could not find it; and I ceased not wandering about from sepulchre to sepulchre, and tomb to tomb, all without success, till night set in. So I returned to the city, yet I could neither eat nor drink; my thoughts being engrossed with my cousin, for that I knew not what was become of him; and I grieved with exceeding grief and passed another sorrowful night, watching until the morning. Then went I a second time to the cemetery, pondering over what the son of mine uncle had done; and, sorely repenting my hearkening to him, went round among all the tombs, but could not find the tomb I sought. I mourned over the past, and remained in my mourning seven days, seeking the place and ever missing the path. Then my torture of scruples<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-191" id="noteref-191" epub:type="noteref">191</a> grew upon me till I well nigh went mad, and I found no way to dispel my grief save travel and return to my father. So I set out and journeyed homeward; but as I was entering my father’s capital a crowd of rioters sprang upon me and pinioned me.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-192" id="noteref-192" epub:type="noteref">192</a> I wondered thereat with all wonderment, seeing that I was the son of the Sultan, and these men were my father’s subjects and amongst them were some of my own slaves. A great fear fell upon me, and I said to my soul,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-193" id="noteref-193" epub:type="noteref">193</a> “Would heaven I knew what hath happened to my father!” I questioned those that bound me of the cause of their so doing, but they returned me no answer. However, after a while one of them said to me (and he had been a hired servant of our house), “Fortune hath been false to thy father; his troops betrayed him and the Wazir who slew him now reigneth in his stead and we lay in wait to seize thee by the bidding of him.” I was well-nigh distraught and felt ready to faint on hearing of my father’s death; when they carried me off and placed me in presence of the usurper. Now between me and him there was an olden grudge, the cause of which was this. I was fond of shooting with the stone-bow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-194" id="noteref-194" epub:type="noteref">194</a> and it befel one day, as I was standing on the terrace-roof of the palace, that a bird lighted on the top of the Wazir’s house when he happened to be there. I shot at the bird and missed the mark; but I hit the Wazir’s eye and knocked it out as fate and fortune decreed. Even so saith the poet:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<span>We tread the path where Fate hath led</span>
							<span>✿ The path Fate writ we fain must tread:</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>And man in one land doomed to die</span>
							<span>✿ Death no where else shall do him dead.</span>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">And on like wise saith another:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<span>Let Fortune have her wanton way</span>
							<span>✿ Take heart and all her words obey:</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>Nor joy nor mourn at anything</span>
							<span>✿ For all things pass and no things stay.</span>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">Now when I knocked out the Wazir’s eye he could not say a single word, for that my father was King of the city; but he hated me ever after and dire was the grudge thus caused between us twain. So when I was set before him hand-bound and pinioned, he straightway gave orders for me to be beheaded. I asked, “For what crime wilt thou put me to death?”; whereupon he answered, “What crime is greater than this?” pointing the while to the place where his eye had been. Quoth I, “This I did by accident not of malice prepense;” and quoth he, “If thou didst it by accident, I will do the like by thee with intention.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-195" id="noteref-195" epub:type="noteref">195</a> Then cried he, “Bring him forward,” and they brought me up to him, when he thrust his finger into my left eye and gouged it out; whereupon I became one-eyed as ye see me. Then he bade bind me hand and foot, and put me into a chest and said to the sworder, “Take charge of this fellow, and go off with him to the waste lands about the city; then draw thy scymitar and slay him, and leave him to feed the beasts and birds.” So the headsman fared forth with me and when he was in the midst of the desert, he took me out of the chest (and I with both hands pinioned and both feet fettered) and was about to bandage my eyes before striking off my head. But I wept with exceeding weeping until I made him weep with me and, looking at him I began to recite these couplets:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<span>I deemed you coat-o’-mail that should withstand</span>
							<span>✿ The foeman’s shafts; and you proved foeman’s brand;</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>I hoped your aidance in mine every chance</span>
							<span>✿ Though fail my left to aid my dexter hand:</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>Aloof you stand and hear the railer’s gibe</span>
							<span>✿ While rain their shafts on me the giber-band:</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>But an ye will not guard me from my foes</span>
							<span>✿ Stand clear, and succour neither these nor those!</span>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">And I also quoted:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<span>I deemed my brethren mail of strongest steel</span>
							<span>✿ And so they were⁠—from foes to fend my dart!</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>I deemed their arrows surest of their aim;</span>
							<span>✿ And so they were⁠—when aiming at my heart!</span>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">When the headsman heard my lines (he had been sworder to my sire and he owed me a debt of gratitude) he cried, “O my lord, what can I do, being but a slave under orders?” presently adding, “Fly for thy life and nevermore return to this land, or they will slay thee and slay me with thee, even as the poet said:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Take thy life and fly whenas evils threat; ✿ Let the ruined house tell its owner’s fate:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>New land for the old thou shalt seek and find ✿ But to find new life thou must not await.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Strange that men should sit in the stead of shame, ✿ When Allah’s world is so wide and great!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And trust not other, in matters grave ✿ Life itself must act for a life beset:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ne’er would prowl the lion with maned neck, ✿ Did he reckon on aid or of others reck.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">Hardly believing in my escape, I kissed his hand and thought the loss of my eye a light matter in consideration of my escaping from being slain. I arrived at my uncle’s capital; and, going in to him, told him of what had befallen my father and myself; whereat he wept with sore weeping and said, “Verily thou addest grief to my grief, and woe to my woe; for thy cousin hath been missing these many days; I wot not what hath happened to him, and none can give me news of him.” And he wept till he fainted. I sorrowed and condoled with him; and he would have applied certain medicaments to my eye, but he saw that it was become as a walnut with the shell empty. Then said he, “O my son, better to lose eye and keep life!” After that I could no longer remain silent about my cousin, who was his only son and one dearly loved, so I told him all that had happened. He rejoiced with extreme joyance to hear news of his son and said, “Come now and show me the tomb;” but I replied, “By Allah, O my uncle, I know not its place, though I sought it carefully full many times, yet could not find the site.” However, I and my uncle went to the grave-yard and looked right and left, till at last I recognised the tomb and we both rejoiced with exceeding joy. We entered the sepulchre and loosened the earth about the grave; then, upraising the trap-door, descended some fifty steps till we came to the foot of the staircase when lo! we were stopped by a blinding smoke. Thereupon said my uncle that saying whose sayer shall never come to shame, “There is no Majesty and there is no Might, save in Allah, the Glorious, the Great!” and we advanced till we suddenly came upon a saloon, whose floor was strewed with flour and grain and provisions and all manner necessaries; and in the midst of it stood a canopy sheltering a couch. Thereupon my uncle went up to the couch and inspecting it found his son and the lady who had gone down with him into the tomb, lying in each other’s embrace; but the twain had become black as charred wood; it was as if they had been cast into a pit of fire. When my uncle saw this spectacle, he spat in his son’s face and said, “Thou hast thy deserts, O thou hog!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-196" id="noteref-196" epub:type="noteref">196</a> this is thy judgment in the transitory world, and yet remaineth the judgment in the world to come, a durer and a more enduring.”⁠⸺⁠And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.</p>
				<p><span class="night-announcement">Now when it was the Twelfth Night,</span> She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Kalandar thus went on with his story before the lady and the Caliph and Jaʼafar:⁠—My uncle struck his son with his slipper<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-197" id="noteref-197" epub:type="noteref">197</a> as he lay there a black heap of coal. I marvelled at his hardness of heart, and grieving for my cousin and the lady, said, “By Allah, O my uncle, calm thy wrath: dost thou not see that all my thoughts are occupied with this misfortune, and how sorrowful I am for what hath befallen thy son, and how horrible it is that naught of him remaineth but a black heap of charcoal? And is not that enough, but thou must smite him with thy slipper?” Answered he, “O son of my brother, this youth from his boyhood was madly in love with his own sister;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-198" id="noteref-198" epub:type="noteref">198</a> and often and often I forbade him from her, saying to myself:⁠—They are but little ones. However, when they grew up sin befel between them; and, although I could hardly believe it, I confined him and chided him and threatened him with the severest threats; and the eunuchs and servants said to him:⁠—Beware of so foul a thing which none before thee ever did, and which none after thee will ever do; and have a care lest thou be dishonoured and disgraced among the Kings of the day, even to the end of time. And I added:⁠—Such a report as this will be spread abroad by caravans, and take heed not to give them cause to talk or I will assuredly curse thee and do thee to death. After that I lodged them apart and shut her up; but the accursed girl loved him with passionate love, for Satan had got the mastery of her as well as of him and made their foul sin seem fair in their sight. Now when my son saw that I separated them, he secretly built this souterrain and furnished it and transported to it victuals, even as thou seest; and, when I had gone out a-sporting, came here with his sister and hid from me. Then His righteous judgment fell upon the twain and consumed them with fire from Heaven; and verily the last judgment will deal them durer pains and more enduring!” Then he wept and I wept with him; and he looked at me and said, “Thou art my son in his stead.” And I bethought me awhile of the world and of its chances, how the Wazir had slain my father and had taken his place and had put out my eye; and how my cousin had come to his death by the strangest chance: and I wept again and my uncle wept with me. Then we mounted the steps and let down the iron plate and heaped up the earth over it; and, after restoring the tomb to its former condition, we returned to the palace. But hardly had we sat down ere we heard the tom-toming of the kettle-drum and tantara of trumpets and clash of cymbals; and the rattling of war-men’s lances; and the clamours of assailants and the clanking of bits and the neighing of steeds; while the world was canopied with dense dust and sand-clouds raised by the horses’ hoofs.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-199" id="noteref-199" epub:type="noteref">199</a> We were amazed at sight and sound, knowing not what could be the matter; so we asked and were told us that the Wazir who had usurped my father’s kingdom had marched his men; and that after levying his soldiery and taking a host of wild Arabs<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-200" id="noteref-200" epub:type="noteref">200</a> into service, he had come down upon us with armies like the sands of the sea; their number none could tell and against them none could prevail. They attacked the city unawares; and the citizens, being powerless to oppose them, surrendered the place: my uncle was slain and I made for the suburbs saying to myself, “If thou fall into this villain’s hands he will assuredly kill thee.” On this wise all my troubles were renewed; and I pondered all that had betided my father and my uncle and I knew not what to do; for if the city people or my father’s troops had recognised me they would have done their best to win favour by destroying me; and I could think of no way to escape save by shaving off my beard and my eyebrows. So I shore them off and, changing my fine clothes for a Kalandar’s rags, I fared forth from my uncle’s capital and made for this city; hoping that peradventure some one would assist me to the presence of the Prince of the Faithful,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-201" id="noteref-201" epub:type="noteref">201</a> and the Caliph who is the Viceregent of Allah upon earth. Thus have I come hither that I might tell him my tale and lay my case before him. I arrived here this very night, and was standing in doubt whither I should go, when suddenly I saw this second Kalandar; so I salam’d to him, saying:⁠—I am a stranger! and he answered:⁠—I too am a stranger! And as we were conversing behold, up came our companion, this third Kalandar, and saluted us saying:⁠—I am a stranger! And we answered:⁠—We too be strangers! Then we three walked on and together till darkness overtook us and Destiny drave us to your house. Such, then, is the cause of the shaving of my beard and mustachios and eyebrows; and the manner of my losing my right eye. They marvelled much at this tale and the Caliph said to Jaʼafar, “By Allah, I have not seen nor have I heard the like of what hath happened to this Kalandar!” Quoth the lady of the house, “Rub thy head and wend thy ways;” but he replied, “I will not go, till I hear the history of the two others.” Thereupon the second Kalandar came forward; and, kissing the ground, began to tell</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-1-4-2" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h4 epub:type="title">The Second Kalandar’s Tale</h4>
				<p>Know, O my lady, that I was not born one-eyed and mine is a strange story; an it were graven with needle-graver on the eye-corners, it were a warner to whoso would be warned. I am a King, son of a King, and was brought up like a Prince. I learned intoning the Koran according the seven schools;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-202" id="noteref-202" epub:type="noteref">202</a> and I read all manner books, and held disputations on their contents with the doctors and men of science; moreover I studied star-lore and the fair sayings of poets and I exercised myself in all branches of learning until I surpassed the people of my time; my skill in calligraphy exceeded that of all the scribes; and my fame was bruited abroad over all climes and cities, and all the kings learned to know my name. Amongst others the King of Hind heard of me and sent to my father to invite me to his court, with offerings and presents and rarities such as befit royalties. So my father fitted out six ships for me and my people; and we put to sea and sailed for the space of a full month till we made the land. Then we brought out the horses that were with us in the ships; and, after loading the camels with our presents for the Prince, we set forth inland. But we had marched only a little way, when behold, a dust-cloud up-flew, and grew until it walled<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-203" id="noteref-203" epub:type="noteref">203</a> the horizon from view. After an hour or so the veil lifted and discovered beneath it fifty horsemen, ravening lions to the sight, in steel armour dight. We observed them straightly and lo! they were cutters-off of the highway, wild as wild Arabs. When they saw that we were only four and had with us but the ten camels carrying the presents, they dashed down upon us with lances at rest. We signed to them, with our fingers, as it were saying, “We be messengers of the great King of Hind, so harm us not!” but they answered on like wise, “We are not in his dominions to obey nor are we subject to his sway.” Then they set upon us and slew some of my slaves and put the lave to flight; and I also fled after I had gotten a wound, a grievous hurt, whilst the Arabs were taken up with the money and the presents which were with us. I went forth unknowing whither I went, having become mean as I was mighty; and I fared on until I came to the crest of a mountain where I took shelter for the night in a cave. When day arose I set out again, nor ceased after this fashion till I arrived at a fair city and a well-filled. Now it was the season when Winter was turning away with his rime and to greet the world with his flowers came Prime, and the young blooms were springing and the streams flowed ringing, and the birds were sweetly singing, as saith the poet concerning a certain city when describing it:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>A place secure from every thought of fear ✿ Safety and peace for ever lord it here:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Its beauties seem to beautify its sons ✿ And as in Heaven its happy folk appear.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">I was glad of my arrival for I was wearied with the way, and yellow of face for weakness and want; but my plight was pitiable and I knew not whither to betake me. So I accosted a Tailor sitting in his little shop and saluted him; he returned my salam, and bade me kindly welcome and wished me well and entreated me gently and asked me of the cause of my strangerhood. I told him all my past from first to last; and he was concerned on my account and said, “O youth, disclose not thy secret to any: the King of this city is the greatest enemy thy father hath, and there is blood-wit<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-204" id="noteref-204" epub:type="noteref">204</a> between them and thou hast cause to fear for thy life.” Then he set meat and drink before me; and I ate and drank and he with me; and we conversed freely till nightfall, when he cleared me a place in a corner of his shop and brought me a carpet and a coverlet. I tarried with him three days; at the end of which time he said to me, “Knowest thou no calling whereby to win thy living, O my son?” “I am learned in the law,” I replied, “and a doctor of doctrine; an adept in art and science, a mathematician and a notable penman.” He rejoined, “Thy calling is of no account in our city, where not a soul understandeth science or even writing or aught save money-making.” Then said I, “By Allah, I know nothing but what I have mentioned;” and he answered, “Gird thy middle and take thee a hatchet and a cord, and go and hew wood in the wold for thy daily bread, till Allah send thee relief; and tell none who thou art lest they slay thee.” Then he bought me an axe and a rope and gave me in charge to certain woodcutters; and with these guardians I went forth into the forest, where I cut fuel-wood the whole of my day and came back in the evening bearing my bundle on my head. I sold it for half a dinar, with part of which I bought provision and laid by the rest. In such work I spent a whole year and when this was ended I went out one day, as was my wont, into the wilderness; and, wandering away from my companions, I chanced on a thickly grown lowland<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-205" id="noteref-205" epub:type="noteref">205</a> in which there was an abundance of wood. So I entered and I found the gnarled stump of a great tree and loosened the ground about it and shovelled away the earth. Presently my hatchet rang upon a copper ring; so I cleared away the soil and behold, the ring was attached to a wooden trap-door. This I raised and there appeared beneath it a staircase. I descended the steps to the bottom and came to a door, which I opened and found myself in a noble hall strong of structure and beautifully built, where was a damsel like a pearl of great price, whose favour banished from my heart all grief and cark and care; and whose soft speech healed the soul in despair and captivated the wise and ware. Her figure measured five feet in height; her breasts were firm and upright; her cheek a very garden of delight; her colour lively bright; her face gleamed like dawn through curly tresses which gloomed like night, and above the snows of her bosom glittered teeth of a pearly white.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-206" id="noteref-206" epub:type="noteref">206</a> As the poet said of one like her:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Slim-waisted loveling, jetty hair-encrowned ✿ A wand of willow on a sandy mound:</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">And as saith another:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<span>Four things that meet not, save they here unite</span>
							<span>✿ To shed my heart-blood and to rape my sprite:</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>Brilliantest forehead; tresses jetty bright;</span>
							<span>✿ Cheeks rosy red and stature beauty-dight.</span>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">When I looked upon her I prostrated myself before Him who had created her, for the beauty and loveliness He had shaped in her, and she looked at me and said, “Art thou man or Jinni?” “I am a man,” answered I, and she, “Now who brought thee to this place where I have abided five-and-twenty years without even yet seeing man in it.” Quoth I (and indeed I found her words wonder-sweet, and my heart was melted to the core by them), “O my lady, my good fortune led me hither for the dispelling of my cark and care.” Then I related to her all my mishap from first to last, and my case appeared to her exceeding grievous; so she wept and said, “I will tell thee my story in my turn. I am the daughter of the King Ifitamus, lord of the Islands of Abnús,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-207" id="noteref-207" epub:type="noteref">207</a> who married me to my cousin, the son of my paternal uncle; but on my wedding night an Ifrit named Jirjís<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-208" id="noteref-208" epub:type="noteref">208</a> bin Rajmús, first cousin that is, mother’s sister’s son, of Iblís, the Foul Fiend, snatched me up and, flying away with me like a bird, set me down in this place, whither he conveyed all I needed of fine stuffs, raiment and jewels and furniture, and meat and drink and other else. Once in every ten days he comes here and lies a single night with me, and then wends his way, for he took me without the consent of his family; and he hath agreed with me that if ever I need him by night or by day, I have only to pass my hand over yonder two lines engraved upon the alcove, and he will appear to me before my fingers cease touching. Four days have now passed since he was here; and, as there remain six days before he come again, say me, wilt thou abide with me five days, and go hence the day before his coming?” I replied “Yes, and yes again! O rare, if all this be not a dream!” Hereat she was glad and, springing to her feet, seized my hand and carried me through an arched doorway to a Hammam-bath, a fair hall and richly decorate. I doffed my clothes, and she doffed hers; then we bathed and she washed me; and when this was done we left the bath, and she seated me by her side upon a high divan, and brought me sherbet scented with musk. When we felt cool after the bath, she set food before me and we ate and fell to talking; but presently she said to me, “Lay thee down and take thy rest, for surely thou must be weary.” So I thanked her, my lady, and lay down and slept soundly, forgetting all that had happened to me. When I awoke I found her rubbing and shampooing my feet;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-209" id="noteref-209" epub:type="noteref">209</a> so I again thanked her and blessed her and we sat for a while talking. Said she, “By Allah, I was sad at heart, for that I have dwelt alone underground for these five-and-twenty years; and praise be to Allah, who hath sent me some one with whom I can converse!” Then she asked, “O youth, what sayest thou to wine?” and I answered, “Do as thou wilt.” Whereupon she went to a cupboard and took out a sealed flask of right old wine and set off the table with flowers and scented herbs and began to sing these lines:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Had we known of thy coming we fain had dispread ✿ The cores of our hearts or the balls of our eyes;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our cheeks as a carpet to greet thee had thrown ✿ And our eyelids had strown for thy feet to betread.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">Now when she finished her verse I thanked her, for indeed love of her had gotten hold of my heart and my grief and anguish were gone. We sat at converse and carousal till nightfall, and with her I spent the night⁠—such night never spent I in all my life! On the morrow delight followed delight till midday, by which time I had drunken wine so freely that I had lost my wits, and stood up, staggering to the right and to the left, and said “Come, O my charmer, and I will carry thee up from this underground vault and deliver thee from the spell of thy Jinni.” She laughed and replied “Content thee and hold thy peace: of every ten days one is for the Ifrit and the other nine are thine.” Quoth I (and in good sooth drink had got the better of me), “This very instant will I break down the alcove whereon is graven the talisman and summon the Ifrit that I may slay him, for it is a practise of mine to slay Ifrits!” When she heard my words her colour waxed wan and she said, “By Allah, do not!” and she began repeating:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>This is a thing wherein destruction lies ✿ I rede thee shun it an thy wits be wise.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">And these also:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<span>O thou who seekest severance, draw the rein</span>
							<span>✿ Of thy swift steed nor seek o’ermuch t’ advance;</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>Ah stay! for treachery is the rule of life,</span>
							<span>✿ And sweets of meeting end in severance.</span>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">I heard her verse but paid no heed to her words, nay, I raised my foot and administered to the alcove a mighty kick⁠—And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.</p>
				<p><span class="night-announcement">Now when it was the Thirteenth Night,</span> She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the second Kalandar thus continued his tale to the lady:⁠—But when, O my mistress, I kicked that alcove with a mighty kick, behold, the air starkened and darkened and thundered and lightened; the earth trembled and quaked and the world became invisible. At once the fumes of wine left my head: I cried to her, “What is the matter?” and she replied, “The Ifrit is upon us! did I not warn thee of this? By Allah, thou hast brought ruin upon me; but fly for thy life and go up by the way thou camest down!” So I fled up the staircase; but, in the excess of my fear, I forgot sandals and hatchet. And when I had mounted two steps I turned to look for them, and lo! I saw the earth cleave asunder, and there arose from it an Ifrit, a monster of hideousness, who said to the damsel, “What trouble and pother be this wherewith thou disturbest me? What mishap hath betided thee?” “No mishap hath befallen me” she answered, “save that my breast was straitened<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-210" id="noteref-210" epub:type="noteref">210</a> and my heart heavy with sadness: so I drank a little wine to broaden it and to hearten myself; then I rose to obey a call of Nature, but the wine had gotten into my head and I fell against the alcove.” “Thou liest, like the whore thou art!” shrieked the Ifrit; and he looked around the hall right and left till he caught sight of my axe and sandals and said to her, “What be these but the belongings of some mortal who hath been in thy society?” She answered, “I never set eyes upon them till this moment: they must have been brought by thee hither cleaving to thy garments.” Quoth the Ifrit, “These words are absurd; thou harlot! thou strumpet!” Then he stripped her stark naked and, stretching her upon the floor, bound her hands and feet to four stakes, like one crucified;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-211" id="noteref-211" epub:type="noteref">211</a> and set about torturing and trying to make her confess. I could not bear to stand listening to her cries and groans; so I climbed the stair on the quake with fear; and when I reached the top I replaced the trap-door and covered it with earth. Then repented I of what I had done with penitence exceeding; and thought of the lady and her beauty and loveliness, and the tortures she was suffering at the hands of the accursed Ifrit, after her quiet life of five-and-twenty years; and how all that had happened to her was for cause of me. I bethought me of my father and his kingly estate and how I had become a woodcutter; and how, after my time had been awhile serene, the world had again waxed turbid and troubled to me. So I wept bitterly and repeated this couplet:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>What time Fate’s tyranny shall most oppress thee ✿ Perpend! one day shall joy thee, one distress thee!</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">Then I walked till I reached the home of my friend, the Tailor, whom I found most anxiously expecting me; indeed he was, as the saying goes, on coals of fire for my account. And when he saw me he said, “All night long my heart hath been heavy, fearing for thee from wild beasts or other mischances. Now praise be to Allah for thy safety!” I thanked him for his friendly solicitude and, retiring to my corner, sat pondering and musing on what had befallen me; and I blamed and chided myself for my meddlesome folly and my frowardness in kicking the alcove. I was calling myself to account when behold, my friend, the Tailor, came to me and said, “O youth, in the shop there is an old man, a Persian,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-212" id="noteref-212" epub:type="noteref">212</a> who seeketh thee: he hath thy hatchet and thy sandals which he had taken to the woodcutters,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-213" id="noteref-213" epub:type="noteref">213</a> saying, I was going out at what time the Muʼazzin began the call to dawn-prayer, when I chanced upon these things and know not whose they are; so direct me to their owner. The woodcutters recognised thy hatchet and directed him to thee: he is sitting in my shop, so fare forth to him and thank him and take thine axe and sandals.” When I heard these words I turned yellow with fear and felt stunned as by a blow; and, before I could recover myself, lo! the floor of my private room clove asunder, and out of it rose the Persian who was the Ifrit. He had tortured the lady with exceeding tortures, natheless she would not confess to him aught; so he took the hatchet and sandals and said to her, “As surely as I am Jirjis of the seed of Iblis, I will bring thee back the owner of this and these!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-214" id="noteref-214" epub:type="noteref">214</a> Then he went to the woodcutters with the pretence aforesaid and, being directed to me, after waiting a while in the shop till the fact was confirmed, he suddenly snatched me up as a hawk snatcheth a mouse and flew high in air; but presently descended and plunged with me under the earth (I being aswoon the while), and lastly set me down in the subterranean palace wherein I had passed that blissful night. And there I saw the lady stripped to the skin, her limbs bound to four stakes and blood welling from her sides. At the sight my eyes ran over with tears; but the Ifrit covered her person and said, “O wanton, is not this man thy lover?” She looked upon me and replied, “I wot him not nor have I ever seen him before this hour!” Quoth the Ifrit, “What! this torture and yet no confessing;” and quoth she, “I never saw this man in my born days, and it is not lawful in Allah’s sight to tell lies on him.” “If thou know him not,” said the Ifrit to her, “take this sword and strike off his head.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-215" id="noteref-215" epub:type="noteref">215</a> She hent the sword in hand and came close up to me; and I signalled to her with my eyebrows, my tears the while flowing adown my cheeks. She understood me and made answer, also by signs, “How couldest thou bring all this evil upon me?” and I rejoined after the same fashion, “This is the time for mercy and forgiveness.” And the mute tongue of my case<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-216" id="noteref-216" epub:type="noteref">216</a> spake aloud saying:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Mine eyes were dragomans for my tongue betied ✿ And told full clear the love I fain would hide:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When last we met and tears in torrents railed ✿ For tongue struck dumb my glances testified:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She signed with eye-glance while her lips were mute ✿ I signed with fingers and she kenned th’ implied:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Our eyebrows did all duty ’twixt us twain; ✿ And we being speechless Love spake loud and plain.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">Then, O my mistress, the lady threw away the sword and said, “How shall I strike the neck of one I wot not, and who hath done me no evil? Such deed were not lawful in my law!” and she held her hand. Said the Ifrit, “ ’Tis grievous to thee to slay thy lover; and, because he hath lain with thee, thou endurest these torments and obstinately refusest to confess. After this it is clear to me that only like loveth and pitieth like.” Then he turned to me and asked me, “O man, haply thou also dost not know this woman;” whereto I answered, “And pray who may she be? assuredly I never saw her till this instant.” “Then take the sword,” said he “and strike off her head and I will believe that, thou wottest her not and will leave thee free to go, and will not deal hardly with thee.” I replied, “That will I do;” and, taking the sword went forward sharply and raised my hand to smite. But she signed to me with her eyebrows, “Have I failed thee in aught of love; and is it thus that thou requitest me?” I understood what her looks implied and answered her with an eye-glance, “I will sacrifice my soul for thee.” And the tongue of the case wrote in our hearts these lines:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>How many a lover with his eyebrows speaketh ✿ To his beloved, as his passion pleadeth:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With flashing eyne his passion he inspireth ✿ And well she seeth what his pleading needeth.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How sweet the look when each on other gazeth; ✿ And with what swiftness and how sure it speedeth:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And this with eyebrows all his passion writeth; ✿ And that with eyeballs all his passion readeth.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">Then my eyes filled with tears to overflowing and I cast the sword from my hand saying, “O mighty Ifrit and hero, if a woman lacking wits and faith deem it unlawful to strike off my head, how can it be lawful for me, a man, to smite her neck whom I never saw in my whole life. I cannot do such misdeed though thou cause me drink the cup of death and perdition.” Then said the Ifrit, “Ye twain show the good understanding between you; but I will let you see how such doings end.” He took the sword, and struck off the lady’s hands first, with four strokes, and then her feet; whilst I looked on and made sure of death and she farewelled me with her dying eyes. So the Ifrit cried at her, “Thou whorest and makest me a wittol with thine eyes;” and struck her so that her head went flying. Then turned he to me and said, “O mortal, we have it in our law that, when the wife committeth advowtry it is lawful for us to slay her. As for this damsel I snatched her away on her bride-night when she was a girl of twelve and she knew no one but myself. I used to come to her once in every ten days and lie with her the night, under the semblance of a man, a Persian; and when I was well assured that she had cuckolded me, I slew her. But as for thee I am not well satisfied that thou hast wronged me in her; nevertheless I must not let thee go unharmed; so ask a boon of me and I will grant it.” Then I rejoiced, O my lady, with exceeding joy and said, “What boon shall I crave of thee?” He replied, “Ask me this boon; into what shape I shall bewitch thee; wilt thou be a dog, or an ass or an ape?” I rejoined (and indeed I had hoped that mercy might be shown me), “By Allah, spare me, that Allah spare thee for sparing a Moslem and a man who never wronged thee.” And I humbled myself before him with exceeding humility, and remained standing in his presence, saying, “I am sore oppressed by circumstance.” He replied “Talk me no long talk, it is in my power to slay thee; but I give thee instead thy choice.” Quoth I, “O thou Ifrit, it would besit thee to pardon me even as the Envied pardoned the Envier.” Quoth he, “And how was that?” and I began to tell him</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-1-4-3" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h4 epub:type="title">The Tale of the Envier and the Envied</h4>
				<p>They relate, O Ifrit, that in a certain city were two men who dwelt in adjoining houses, having a common party-wall; and one of them envied the other and looked on him with an evil eye,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-217" id="noteref-217" epub:type="noteref">217</a> and did his utmost endeavour to injure him; and, albeit at all times he was jealous of his neighbour, his malice at last grew on him till he could hardly eat or enjoy the sweet pleasures of sleep. But the Envied did nothing save prosper; and the more the other strove to injure him, the more he got and gained and throve. At last the malice of his neighbour and the man’s constant endeavour to work him a harm came to his knowledge; so he said, “By Allah! God’s earth is wide enough for its people;” and, leaving the neighbourhood, he repaired to another city where he bought himself a piece of land in which was a dried up draw-well,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-218" id="noteref-218" epub:type="noteref">218</a> old and in ruinous condition. Here he built him an oratory and, furnishing it with a few necessaries, took up his abode therein, and devoted himself to prayer and worshipping Allah Almighty; and Fakirs and holy mendicants flocked to him from all quarters; and his fame went abroad through the city and that country side. Presently the news reached his envious neighbour, of what good fortune had befallen him and how the city notables had become his disciples; so he travelled to the place and presented himself at the holy man’s hermitage, and was met by the Envied with welcome and greeting and all honour. Then quoth the Envier, “I have a word to say to thee; and this is the cause of my faring hither, and I wish to give thee a piece of good news; so come with me to thy cell.” Thereupon the Envied arose and took the Envier by the hand, and they went in to the inmost part of the hermitage; but the Envier said, “Bid thy Fakirs retire to their cells, for I will not tell thee what I have to say, save in secret where none may hear us.” Accordingly the Envied said to his Fakirs, “Retire to your private cells;” and, when all had done as he bade them, he set out with his visitor and walked a little way until the twain reached the ruinous old well. And as they stood upon the brink the Envier gave the Envied a push which tumbled him headlong into it, unseen of any; whereupon he fared forth, and went his ways, thinking to have had slain him. Now this well happened to be haunted by the Jann who, seeing the case, bore him up and let him down little by little, till he reached the bottom, when they seated him upon a large stone. Then one of them asked his fellows, “Wot ye who be this man?” and they answered, “Nay.” “This man,” continued the speaker, “is the Envied hight who, flying from the Envier, came to dwell in our city, and here founded this holy house, and he hath edified us by his litanies<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-219" id="noteref-219" epub:type="noteref">219</a> and his lections of the Koran; but the Envier set out and journeyed till he rejoined him, and cunningly contrived to deceive him and cast him into the well where we now are. But the fame of this good man hath this very night come to the Sultan of our city who designeth to visit him on the morrow on account of his daughter.” “What aileth his daughter?” asked one, and another answered “She is possessed of a spirit; for Maymun, son of Damdam, is madly in love with her; but, if this pious man knew the remedy, her cure would be as easy as could be.” Hereupon one of them inquired, “And what is the medicine?” and he replied, “The black tom-cat which is with him in the oratory hath, on the end of his tail, a white spot, the size of a dirham; let him pluck seven white hairs from the spot, then let him fumigate her therewith and the Marid will flee from her and not return; so she shall be sane for the rest of her life. All this took place, O Ifrit, within earshot of the Envied who listened readily. When dawn broke and morn arose in sheen and shone, the Fakirs went to seek the Shaykh and found him climbing up the wall of the well; whereby he was magnified in their eyes.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-220" id="noteref-220" epub:type="noteref">220</a> Then, knowing that naught save the black tom-cat could supply him with the remedy required, he plucked the seven tail-hairs from the white spot and laid them by him; and hardly had the sun risen ere the Sultan entered the hermitage, with the great lords of his estate, bidding the rest of his retinue to remain standing outside. The Envied gave him a hearty welcome, and seating him by his side asked him, “Shall I tell thee the cause of thy coming?” The King answered “Yes.” He continued, “Thou hast come upon pretext of a visitation;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-221" id="noteref-221" epub:type="noteref">221</a> but it is in thy heart to question me of thy daughter.” Replied the King, “ ’Tis even so, O thou holy Shaykh;” and the Envied continued, “Send and fetch her, and I trust to heal her forthright (an such it be the will of Allah!). The King in great joy sent for his daughter, and they brought her pinioned and fettered. The Envied made her sit down behind a curtain and taking out the hairs fumigated her therewith; whereupon that which was in her head cried out and departed from her. The girl was at once restored to her right mind and veiling her face, said, “What hath happened and who brought me hither?” The Sultan rejoiced with a joy which nothing could exceed, and kissed his daughter’s eyes,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-222" id="noteref-222" epub:type="noteref">222</a> and the holy man’s hand; then, turning to his great lords, he asked, “How say ye! What fee deserveth he who hath made my daughter whole?” and all answered “He deserveth her to wife;” and the King said, “Ye speak sooth!” So he married him to her and the Envied thus became son-in-law to the King. And after a little the Wazir died and the King said, “Whom can I make Minister in his stead?” “Thy son-in-law,” replied the courtiers. So the Envied became a Wazir; and after a while the Sultan also died and the lieges said, “Whom shall we make King?” and all cried, “The Wazir.” So the Wazir was forthright made Sultan, and he became King regnant, a true ruler of men. One day as he had mounted his horse; and, in the eminence of his kinglihood, was riding amidst his Emirs and Wazirs and the Grandees of his realm his eye fell upon his old neighbour, the Envier, who stood afoot on his path; so he turned to one of his Ministers, and said, “Bring hither that man and cause him no affright.” The Wazir brought him and the King said, “Give him a thousand miskáls<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-223" id="noteref-223" epub:type="noteref">223</a> of gold from the treasury, and load him ten camels with goods for trade, and send him under escort to his own town.” Then he bade his enemy farewell and sent him away and forbore to punish him for the many and great evils he had done. See, O Ifrit, the mercy of the Envied to the Envier, who had hated him from the beginning and had borne him such bitter malice and never met him without causing him trouble; and had driven him from house and home, and then had journeyed for the sole purpose of taking his life by throwing him into the well. Yet he did not requite his injurious dealing, but forgave him and was bountiful to him.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-224" id="noteref-224" epub:type="noteref">224</a> Then I wept before him, O my lady, with sore weeping, never was there sorer, and I recited:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Pardon my fault, for ’tis the wise man’s wont ✿ All faults to pardon and revenge forgo:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In sooth all manner faults in me contain ✿ Then deign of goodness mercy-grace to show:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Whoso imploreth pardon from on High ✿ Should hold his hand from sinners here below.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">Said the Ifrit, “Lengthen not thy words! As to my slaying thee fear it not, and as to my pardoning thee hope it not; but from my bewitching thee there is no escape.” Then he tore me from the ground which closed under my feet and flew with me into the firmament till I saw the earth as a large white cloud or a saucer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-225" id="noteref-225" epub:type="noteref">225</a> in the midst of the waters. Presently he set me down on a mountain, and taking a little dust, over which he muttered some magical words, sprinkled me therewith, saying, “Quit that shape and take thou the shape of an ape!” And on the instant I became an ape, a tail-less baboon, the son of a century<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-226" id="noteref-226" epub:type="noteref">226</a>. Now when he had left me and I saw myself in this ugly and hateful shape, I wept for myself, but resigned my soul to the tyranny of Time and Circumstance, well weeting that Fortune is fair and constant to no man. I descended the mountain and found at the foot a desert plain, long and broad, over which I travelled for the space of a month till my course brought me to the brink of the briny sea.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-227" id="noteref-227" epub:type="noteref">227</a> After standing there awhile, I was ware of a ship in the offing which ran before a fair wind making for the shore: I hid myself behind a rock on the beach and waited till the ship drew near, when I leaped on board. I found her full of merchants and passengers and one of them cried, “O Captain, this ill-omened brute will bring us ill-luck!” and another said, “Turn this ill-omened beast out from among us;” the Captain said, “Let us kill it!” another said, “Slay it with the sword;” a third, “Drown it;” and a fourth, “Shoot it with an arrow.” But I sprang up and laid hold of the Rais’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-228" id="noteref-228" epub:type="noteref">228</a> skirt, and shed tears which poured down my chops. The Captain took pity on me, and said, “O merchants! this ape hath appealed to me for protection and I will protect him; henceforth he is under my charge: so let none do him aught hurt or harm, otherwise there will be bad blood between us.” Then he entreated me kindly and whatsoever he said I understood and ministered to his every want and served him as a servant, albeit my tongue would not obey my wishes; so that he came to love me. The vessel sailed on, the wind being fair, for the space of fifty days; at the end of which we cast anchor under the walls of a great city wherein was a world of people, especially learned men, none could tell their number save Allah. No sooner had we arrived than we were visited by certain Mameluke-officials from the King of that city; who, after boarding us, greeted the merchants and giving them joy of safe arrival said, “Our King welcometh you, and sendeth you this roll of paper, whereupon each and every of you must write a line. For ye shall know that the King’s Minister, a calligrapher of renown, is dead, and the King hath sworn a solemn oath that he will make none Wazir in his stead who cannot write as well as he could.” He then gave us the scroll which measured ten cubits long by a breadth of one, and each of the merchants who knew how to write wrote a line thereon, even to the last of them; after which I stood up (still in the shape of an ape) and snatched the roll out of their hands. They feared lest I should tear it or throw it overboard; so they tried to stay me and scare me, but I signed to them that I could write, whereat all marvelled, saying, “We never yet saw an ape write.” And the Captain cried, “Let him write; and if he scribble and scrabble we will kick him out and kill him; but if he write fair and scholarly I will adopt him as my son; for surely I never yet saw a more intelligent and well-mannered monkey than he. Would Heaven my real son were his match in morals and manners.” I took the reed, and stretching out my paw, dipped it in ink and wrote, in the hand used for letters,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-229" id="noteref-229" epub:type="noteref">229</a> these two couplets:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<span>Time hath recorded gifts she gave the great;</span>
							<span>✿ But none recorded thine which be far higher;</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>Allah ne’er orphan men by loss of thee</span>
							<span>✿ Who be of Goodness mother, Bounty’s sire.</span>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">And I wrote in Rayháni or larger letters elegantly curved:⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-230" id="noteref-230" epub:type="noteref">230</a></p>
				<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<span>Thou hast a reed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-231" id="noteref-231" epub:type="noteref">231</a> of rede to every land,</span>
							<span>✿ Whose driving causeth all the world to thrive;</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>Nil is the Nile of Misraim by thy boons</span>
							<span>✿ Who makest misery smile with fingers five.</span>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Then I wrote in the Suls<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-232" id="noteref-232" epub:type="noteref">232</a> character:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<span>There be no writer who from Death shall fleet,</span>
							<span>✿ But what his hand hath writ men shall repeat:</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>Write, therefore, naught save what shall serve thee when</span>
							<span>✿ Thou see’t on Judgment-Day an so thou see’t!</span>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">Then I wrote in the character Naskh:⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-233" id="noteref-233" epub:type="noteref">233</a></p>
				<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<span>When to sore parting Fate our love shall doom,</span>
							<span>✿ To distant life by Destiny decreed,</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>We cause the inkhorn’s lips to ’plain our pains,</span>
							<span>✿ And tongue our utterance with the talking reed.</span>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">And I wrote in the Túmár character<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-234" id="noteref-234" epub:type="noteref">234</a>:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<span>Kingdom with none endures; if thou deny</span>
							<span>✿ This truth, where be the Kings of earlier earth?</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>Set trees of goodliness while rule endures,</span>
							<span>✿ And when thou art fallen they shall tell thy worth.</span>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">And I wrote in the character Muhakkak<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-235" id="noteref-235" epub:type="noteref">235</a>:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<span>When oped the inkhorn of thy wealth and fame</span>
							<span>✿ Take ink of generous heart and gracious hand;</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>Write brave and noble deeds while write thou can</span>
							<span>✿ And win thee praise from point of pen and brand.</span>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">Then I gave the scroll to the officials and, after we all had written our line, they carried it before the King. When he saw the paper no writing pleased him save my writing; and he said to the assembled courtiers, “Go seek the writer of these lines and dress him in a splendid robe of honour; then mount him on a she-mule,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-236" id="noteref-236" epub:type="noteref">236</a> let a band of music precede him and bring him to the presence.” At these words they smiled and the King was wroth with them and cried “O accursed! I give you an order and you laugh at me?” “O King,” replied they, “if we laugh ’tis not at thee and not without a cause.” “And what is it?” asked he; and they answered, “O King, thou orderest us to bring to thy presence the man who wrote these lines; now the truth is that he who wrote them is not of the sons of Adam,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-237" id="noteref-237" epub:type="noteref">237</a> but an ape, a tail-less baboon, belonging to the ship-Captain.” Quoth he, “Is this true that you say?” Quoth they “Yea! by the rights of thy munificence!” The King marvelled at their words and shook with mirth and said, “I am minded to buy this ape of the Captain.” Then he sent messengers to the ship with the mule, the dress, the guard and the state-drums, saying, “Not the less do you clothe him in the robe of honour and mount him on the mule and let him be surrounded by the guards and preceded by the band of music.” They came to the ship and took me from the Captain and robed me in the robe of honour and, mounting me on the she-mule, carried me in state-procession through the streets; whilst the people were amazed and amused. And folk said to one another “Halloo! is our Sultan about to make an ape his Minister?”; and came all agog crowding to gaze at me, and the town was astir and turned topsy-turvy on my account. When they brought me up to the King and set me in his presence, I kissed the ground before him three times, and once before the High Chamberlain and great officers, and he bade me be seated, and I sat respectfully on shins and knees,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-238" id="noteref-238" epub:type="noteref">238</a> and all who were present marvelled at my fine manners, and the King most of all. Thereupon he ordered the lieges to retire; and, when none remained save the King’s majesty, the Eunuch on duty and a little white slave, he bade them set before me the table of food, containing all manner of birds, whatever hoppeth and flieth and treadeth in nest, such as quail and sand-grouse. Then he signed to me to eat with him; so I rose and kissed ground before him, then sat me down and ate with him. And when the table was removed I washed my hands in seven waters and took the reed-case and reed; and wrote instead of speaking these couplets:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Wail for the little partridges on porringer and plate; ✿ Cry for the ruin of the fries and stews well marinate:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Keen as I keen for loved, lost daughters of the Katá-grouse,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-239" id="noteref-239" epub:type="noteref">239</a> ✿ And omelette round the fair enbrownèd fowls agglomerate:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O fire in heart of me for fish, those <i xml:lang="fr">deux poissons</i> I saw, ✿ Bedded on new made scones<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-240" id="noteref-240" epub:type="noteref">240</a> and cakes in piles to laniate.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For thee, O vermicelli! aches my very maw! I hold ✿ Without thee every taste and joy are clean annihilate.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those eggs have rolled their yellow eyes in torturing pains of fire ✿ Ere served with hash and fritters hot, that delicatest cate,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Praisèd be Allah for His baked and roast and ah! how good ✿ This pulse, these pot-herbs steeped in oil with eysill combinate!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When hunger sated was, I elbow-propt fell back upon ✿ Meat-pudding<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-241" id="noteref-241" epub:type="noteref">241</a> wherein gleamed the bangles that my wits amate.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Then woke I sleeping appetite to eat as though in sport ✿ Sweets from brocaded trays and kickshaws most elaborate.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Be patient, soul of me! Time is a haughty, jealous wight; ✿ To-day he seems dark-lowering and to-morrow fair to sight.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-242" id="noteref-242" epub:type="noteref">242</a></span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">Then I rose and seated myself at a respectful distance while the King read what I had written, and marvelled, exclaiming, “O the miracle, that an ape should be gifted with this graceful style and this power of penmanship! By Allah, ’tis a wonder of wonders!” Presently they set before the King choice wines in flagons of glass and he drank: then he passed on the cup to me; and I kissed the ground and drank and wrote on it:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<span>With fire they boilèd me to loose my tongue,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-243" id="noteref-243" epub:type="noteref">243</a></span>
							<span>✿ And pain and patience gave for fellowship:</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>Hence comes it hands of men upbear me high</span>
							<span>✿ And honey-dew from lips of maid I sip!</span>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">And these also:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<span>Morn saith to Night, “withdraw and let me shine;”</span>
							<span>✿ So drain we draughts that dull all pain and pine:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-244" id="noteref-244" epub:type="noteref">244</a></span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>I doubt, so fine the glass, the wine so clear,</span>
							<span>✿ If ’tis the wine in glass or glass in wine.</span>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">The King read my verse and said with a sigh, “Were these gifts<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-245" id="noteref-245" epub:type="noteref">245</a> in a man, he would excel all the folk of his time and age!” Then he called for the chess-board, and said, “Say, wilt thou play with me?”; and I signed with my head, “Yes.” Then I came forward and ordered the pieces and played with him two games, both of which I won. He was speechless with surprise; so I took the pen-case and, drawing forth a reed, wrote on the board these two couplets:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<span>Two hosts fare fighting thro’ the livelong day</span>
							<span>✿ Nor is their battling ever finishèd,</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>Until, when darkness girdeth them about,</span>
							<span>✿ The twain go sleeping in a single bed.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-246" id="noteref-246" epub:type="noteref">246</a></span>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">The King read these lines with wonder and delight and said to his Eunuch,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-247" id="noteref-247" epub:type="noteref">247</a> “O Mukbil, go to thy mistress, Sitt al-Husn,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-248" id="noteref-248" epub:type="noteref">248</a> and say her, Come, speak the King who biddeth thee hither to take thy solace in seeing this right wondrous ape!” So the Eunuch went out and presently returned with the lady who, when she saw me veiled her face and said, “O my father! hast thou lost all sense of honour? How cometh it thou art pleased to send for me and show me to strange men?” “O Sitt al-Husn,” said he, “no man is here save this little foot-page and the Eunuch who reared thee and I, thy father. From whom, then, dost thou veil thy face?” She answered, “This whom thou deemest an ape is a young man, a clever and polite, a wise and learned and the son of a King; but he is ensorcelled and the Ifrit Jirjaris, who is of the seed of Iblis, cast a spell upon him, after putting to death his own wife the daughter of King Ifitamus lord of the Islands of Abnus.” The King marvelled at his daughter’s words and, turning to me, said, “Is this true that she saith of thee?”; and I signed by a nod of my head the answer “Yea, verily;” and wept sore. Then he asked his daughter “Whence knewest thou that he is ensorcelled?”; and she answered “O my dear papa, there was with me in my childhood an old woman, a wily one and a wise and a witch to boot, and she taught me the theory of magic and its practice; and I took notes in writing and therein waxed perfect, and have committed to memory an hundred and seventy chapters of egromantic formulas, by the least of which I could transport the stones of thy city behind the Mountain Kaf and the Circumambient Main,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-249" id="noteref-249" epub:type="noteref">249</a> or make its site an abyss of the sea and its people fishes swimming in the midst of it.” “O my daughter,” said her father, “I conjure thee, by my life, disenchant this young man, that I may make him my Wazir and marry thee to him, for indeed he is an ingenious youth and a deeply learned.” “With joy and goodly gree,” she replied and, hending in hand an iron knife whereon was inscribed the name of Allah in Hebrew characters, she described a wide circle⁠—And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.</p>
				<p><span class="night-announcement">Now when it was the Fourteenth Night,</span> She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Kalandar continued his tale thus:⁠—O my lady, the King’s daughter hent in hand a knife whereon were inscribed Hebrew characters and described a wide circle in the midst of the palace-hall, and therein wrote in Cufic letters mysterious names and talismans; and she uttered words and muttered charms, some of which we understood and others we understood not. Presently the world waxed dark before our sight till we thought that the sky was falling upon our heads, and lo! the Ifrit presented himself in his own shape and aspect. His hands were like many-pronged pitchforks, his legs like the masts of great ships, and his eyes like cressets of gleaming fire. We were in terrible fear of him but the King’s daughter cried at him, “No welcome to thee and no greeting, O dog!” whereupon he changed to the form of a lion and said, “O traitress, how is it thou hast broken the oath we sware that neither should contraire other!” “O accursed one,” answered she, “how could there be a compact between me and the like of thee?” Then said he, “Take what thou has brought on thyself;” and the lion opened his jaws and rushed upon her; but she was too quick for him; and, plucking a hair from her head, waved it in the air muttering over it the while; and the hair straightway became a trenchant sword-blade, wherewith she smote the lion and cut him in twain. Then the two halves flew away in air and the head changed to a scorpion and the Princess became a huge serpent and set upon the accursed scorpion, and the two fought, coiling and uncoiling, a stiff fight for an hour at least. Then the scorpion changed to a vulture and the serpent became an eagle which set upon the vulture, and hunted him for an hour’s time, till he became a black tom-cat, which miauled and grinned and spat. Thereupon the eagle changed into a piebald wolf and these two battled in the palace for a long time, when the cat, seeing himself overcome, changed into a worm and crept into a huge red pomegranate,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-250" id="noteref-250" epub:type="noteref">250</a> which lay beside the jetting fountain in the midst of the palace hall. Whereupon the pomegranate swelled to the size of a water-melon in air; and, falling upon the marble pavement of the palace, broke to pieces, and all the grains fell out and were scattered about till they covered the whole floor. Then the wolf shook himself and became a snow-white cock, which fell to picking up the grains purposing not to leave one; but by doom of destiny one seed rolled to the fountain-edge and there lay hid. The cock fell to crowing and clapping his wings and signing to us with his beak as if to ask, “Are any grains left?” But we understood not what he meant, and he cried to us with so loud a cry that we thought the palace would fall upon us. Then he ran over all the floor till he saw the grain which had rolled to the fountain edge, and rushed eagerly to pick it up when behold, it sprang into the midst of the water and became a fish and dived to the bottom of the basin. Thereupon the cock changed to a big fish, and plunged in after the other, and the two disappeared for a while and lo! we heard loud shrieks and cries of pain which made us tremble. After this the Ifrit rose out of the water, and he was as a burning flame; casting fire and smoke from his mouth and eyes and nostrils. And immediately the Princess likewise came forth from the basin and she was one live coal of flaming lowe; and these two, she and he, battled for the space of an hour, until their fires entirely compassed them about and their thick smoke filled the palace. As for us we panted for breath, being well-nigh suffocated, and we longed to plunge into the water fearing lest we be burnt up and utterly destroyed; and the King said, “There is no Majesty and there is no Might save in Allah the Glorious, the Great! Verily we are Allah’s and unto Him are we returning! Would Heaven I had not urged my daughter to attempt the disenchantment of this ape-fellow, whereby I have imposed upon her the terrible task of fighting yon accursed Ifrit against whom all the Ifrits in the world could not prevail. And would Heaven we had never seen this ape, Allah never assain nor bless the day of his coming! We thought to do a good deed by him before the face of Allah,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-251" id="noteref-251" epub:type="noteref">251</a> and to release him from enchantment, and now we have brought this trouble and travail upon our heart.” But I, O my lady, was tongue-tied and powerless to say a word to him. Suddenly, ere we were ware of aught, the Ifrit yelled out from under the flames and, coming up to us as we stood on the estrade, blew fire in our faces. The damsel overtook him and breathed blasts of fire at his face and the sparks from her and from him rained down upon us, and her sparks did us no harm, but one of his sparks alighted upon my eye and destroyed it making me a monocular ape; and another fell on the King’s face scorching the lower half, burning off his beard and mustachios and causing his under teeth to fall out; while a third alighted on the Castrato’s breast, killing him on the spot. So we despaired of life and made sure of death when lo! a voice repeated the saying, “Allah is most Highest! Allah is most Highest! Aidance and victory to all who the Truth believe; and disappointment and disgrace to all who the religion of Mohammed, the Moon of Faith, unbelieve,” The speaker was the Princess who had burnt the Ifrit, and he was become a heap of ashes. Then she came up to us and said, “Reach me a cup of water.” They brought it to her and she spoke over it words we understood not, and sprinkling me with it cried, “By virtue of the Truth, and by the Most Great name of Allah, I charge thee return to thy former shape.” And behold, I shook and became a man as before, save that I had utterly lost an eye. Then she cried out, “The fire! The fire! O my dear papa an arrow from the accursed hath wounded me to the death, for I am not used to fight with the Jann; had he been a man I had slain him in the beginning. I had no trouble till the time when the pomegranate burst and the grains scattered, but I overlooked the seed wherein was the very life of the Jinni. Had I picked it up he had died on the spot, but as Fate and Fortune decreed, I saw it not; so he came upon me all unawares and there befel between him and me a sore struggle under the earth and high in air and in the water; and, as often as I opened on him a gate,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-252" id="noteref-252" epub:type="noteref">252</a> he opened on me another gate and a stronger, till at last he opened on me the gate of fire, and few are saved upon whom the door of fire openeth. But Destiny willed that my cunning prevail over his cunning; and I burned him to death after I vainly exhorted him to embrace the religion of Al-Islam. As for me I am a dead woman; Allah supply my place to you!” Then she called upon Heaven for help and ceased not to implore relief from the fire; when lo! a black spark shot up from her robed feet to her thighs; then it flew to her bosom and thence to her face. When it reached her face she wept and said, “I testify that there is no god but <em>the</em> God and that Mahommed is the Apostle of God!” And we looked at her and saw naught but a heap of ashes by the side of the heap that had been the Ifrit. We mourned for her and I wished I had been in her place, so had I not seen her lovely face who had worked me such weal become ashes; but there is no gainsaying the will of Allah. When the King saw his daughter’s terrible death, he plucked out what was left of his beard and beat his face and rent his raiment; and I did as he did and we both wept over her. Then came in the Chamberlains and Grandees and were amazed to find two heaps of ashes and the Sultan in a fainting fit; so they stood round him till he revived and told them what had befallen his daughter from the Ifrit; whereat their grief was right grievous and the women and the slave-girls shrieked and keened,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-253" id="noteref-253" epub:type="noteref">253</a> and they continued their lamentations for the space of seven days. Moreover the King bade build over his daughter’s ashes a vast vaulted tomb, and burn therein wax tapers and sepulchral lamps: but as for the Ifrit’s ashes they scattered them on the winds, speeding them to the curse of Allah. Then the Sultan fell sick of a sickness that well nigh brought him to his death for a month’s space; and, when health returned to him and his beard grew again and he had been converted by the mercy of Allah to Al-Islam, he sent for me and said, “O youth, Fate had decreed for us the happiest of lives, safe from all the chances and changes of Time, till thou camest to us, when troubles fell upon us. Would to Heaven we had never seen thee and the foul face of thee! For we took pity on thee and thereby we have lost our all. I have on thy account first lost my daughter who to me was well worth an hundred men; secondly I have suffered that which befel me by reason of the fire and the loss of my teeth, and my Eunuch also was slain. I blame thee not, for it was out of thy power to prevent this: the doom of Allah was on thee as well as on us and thanks be to the Almighty for that my daughter delivered thee, albeit thereby she lost her own life! Go forth now, O my son, from this my city, and suffice thee what hath befallen us through thee, even although ’twas decreed for us. Go forth in peace; and if I ever see thee again I will surely slay thee.” And he cried out at me. So I went forth from his presence, O my lady, weeping bitterly and hardly believing in my escape and knowing not whither I should wend. And I recalled all that had befallen me, my meeting the tailor, my love for the damsel in the palace beneath the earth, and my narrow escape from the Ifrit, even after he had determined to do me die; and how I had entered the city as an ape and was now leaving it a man once more. Then I gave thanks to Allah and said, “My eye and not my life!” and before leaving the place I entered the bath and shaved my poll and beard and mustachios and eyebrows; and cast ashes on my head and donned the coarse black woollen robe of a Kalandar. Then I fared forth, O my lady, and every day I pondered all the calamities which had betided me, and I wept and repeated these couplets:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“I am distraught, yet verily His ruth abides with me, ✿ Tho’ round me gather hosts of ills, whence come I cannot see:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Patient I’ll be till Patience self with me impatient wax; ✿ Patient for ever till the Lord fulfil my destiny:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Patient I’ll bide without complaint, a wronged and vanquisht man; ✿ Patient as sunparcht wight that spans the desert’s sandy sea:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Patient I’ll be till Aloe’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-254" id="noteref-254" epub:type="noteref">254</a> self unwittingly allow ✿ I’m patient under bitterer things than bitterest aloë:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>No bitterer things than aloes or than patience for mankind; ✿ Yet bitterer than the twain to me were Patience’ treachery:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My sere and seamed and seared brow would dragoman my sore ✿ If soul could search my sprite and there unsecret secrecy:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Were hills to bear the load I bear they’d crumble ’neath the weight; ✿ ’Twould still the roaring wind, ’twould quench the flame-tongue’s flagrancy,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And whoso saith the world is sweet certès a day he’ll see ✿ With more than aloes’ bitterness and aloes’ pungency.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Then I journeyed through many regions and saw many a city intending for Baghdad, that I might seek audience, in the House of Peace,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-255" id="noteref-255" epub:type="noteref">255</a> with the Commander of the Faithful and tell him all that had befallen me. I arrived here this very night and found my brother in Allah, this first Kalandar, standing about as one perplexed; so I saluted him with “Peace be upon thee,” and entered into discourse with him. Presently up came our brother, this third Kalandar, and said to us, “Peace be with you! I am a stranger;” whereto we replied, “And we too be strangers, who have come hither this blessed night.” So we all three walked on together, none of us knowing the other’s history, till Destiny drave us to this door and we came in to you. Such then is my story and my reason for shaving my beard and mustachios, and this is what caused the loss of my eye. Said the house-mistress “Thy tale is indeed a rare; so rub thy head and wend thy ways;” but he replied, “I will not budge till I hear my companions’ stories.” Then came forward the third Kalandar, and said, “O illustrious lady! my history is not like that of these my comrades, but more wondrous and far more marvellous. In their case Fate and Fortune came down on them unawares; but I drew down destiny upon my own head and brought sorrow on mine own soul, and shaved my own beard and lost my own eye. Hear then”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-1-4-4" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h4 epub:type="title">The Third Kalandar’s Tale</h4>
				<p>Know, O my lady, that I also am a King and the Son of a King and my name is Ajíb son of Khazíb. When my father died I succeeded him; and I ruled and did justice and dealt fairly by all my lieges. I delighted in sea trips, for my capital stood on the shore, before which the ocean stretched far and wide; and nearhand were many great islands with sconces and garrisons in the midst of the main. My fleet numbered fifty merchantmen, and as many yachts for pleasance, and an hundred and fifty sail ready fitted for holy war with the Unbelievers. It fortuned that I had a mind to enjoy myself on the islands aforesaid, so I took ship with my people in ten keel; and, carrying with me a month’s victual, I set out on a twenty days voyage. But one night a head wind struck us, and the sea rose against us with huge waves; the billows sorely buffetted us and a dense darkness settled round us. We gave ourselves up for lost and I said, “Whoso endangereth his days, e’en an he ’scape deserveth no praise.” Then we prayed to Allah and besought Him; but the storm-blasts ceased not to blow against us nor the surges to strike us till morning broke, when the gale fell, the seas sank to mirrory stillness and the sun shone upon us kindly clear. Presently we made an island where we landed and cooked somewhat of food, and ate heartily and took our rest for a couple of days. Then we set out again and sailed other twenty days, the seas broadening and the land shrinking. Presently the current ran counter to us, and we found ourselves in strange waters, where the Captain had lost his reckoning, and was wholly bewildered in this sea; so said we to the look-out man,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-256" id="noteref-256" epub:type="noteref">256</a> “Get thee to the mast-head and keep thine eyes open.” He swarmed up the mast and looked out and cried aloud, “O Rais, I espy to starboard something dark, very like a fish floating on the face of the sea, and to larboard there is a loom in the midst of the main, now black and now bright.” When the Captain heard the look-out’s words he dashed his turband on the deck and plucked out his beard and beat his face saying, “Good news indeed! we be all dead men; not one of us can be saved.” And he fell to weeping and all of us wept for his weeping and also for our lives; and I said, “O Captain, tell us what it is the look-out saw.” “O my Prince,” answered he, “know that we lost our course on the night of the storm, which was followed on the morrow by a two-days’ calm during which we made no way; and we have gone astray eleven days reckoning from that night, with ne’er a wind to bring us back to our true course. To-morrow by the end of the day we shall come to a mountain of black stone, hight the Magnet Mountain;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-257" id="noteref-257" epub:type="noteref">257</a> for thither the currents carry us willy-nilly. As soon as we are under its lea, the ship’s sides will open and every nail in plank will fly out and cleave fast to the mountain; for that Almighty Allah hath gifted the loadstone with a mysterious virtue and a love for iron, by reason whereof all which is iron travelleth towards it; and on this mountain is much iron, how much none knoweth save the Most High, from the many vessels which have been lost there since the days of yore. The bright spot upon its summit is a dome of yellow laton from Andalusia, vaulted upon ten columns; and on its crown is a horseman who rideth a horse of brass and holdeth in hand a lance of laton; and there hangeth on his bosom a tablet of lead graven with names and talismans.” And he presently added, “And, O King, none destroyeth folk save the rider on that steed, nor will the egromancy be dispelled till he fall from his horse.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-258" id="noteref-258" epub:type="noteref">258</a> Then, O my lady, the Captain wept with exceeding weeping and we all made sure of death-doom and each and every one of us farewelled his friend and charged him with his last will and testament in case he might be saved. We slept not that night and in the morning we found ourselves much nearer the Loadstone Mountain, whither the waters drave us with a violent send. When the ships were close under its lea they opened and the nails flew out and all the iron in them sought the Magnet Mountain and clove to it like a network; so that by the end of the day we were all struggling in the waves round about the mountain. Some of us were saved, but more were drowned and even those who had escaped knew not one another, so stupefied were they by the beating of the billows and the raving of the winds. As for me, O my lady, Allah (be His name exalted!) preserved my life that I might suffer whatso He willed to me of hardship, misfortune and calamity; for I scrambled upon a plank from one of the ships, and the wind and waters threw it at the feet of the Mountain. There I found a practicable path leading by steps carven out of the rock to the summit, and I called on the name of Allah Almighty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-259" id="noteref-259" epub:type="noteref">259</a>⁠⸺⁠And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.</p>
				<p><span class="night-announcement">Now when it was the Fifteenth Night,</span> She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the third Kalandar said to the lady (the rest of the party sitting fast bound and the slaves standing with swords drawn over their heads):⁠—And after calling on the name of Almighty Allah and passionately beseeching Him, I breasted the ascent, clinging to the steps and notches hewn in the stone, and mounted little by little. And the Lord stilled the wind and aided me in the ascent, so that I succeeded in reaching the summit. There I found no resting-place save the dome, which I entered, joying with exceeding joy at my escape; and made the Wuzu-ablution<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-260" id="noteref-260" epub:type="noteref">260</a> and prayed a two-bow prayer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-261" id="noteref-261" epub:type="noteref">261</a> a thanksgiving to God for my preservation. Then I fell asleep under the dome, and heard in my dream a mysterious Voice<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-262" id="noteref-262" epub:type="noteref">262</a> saying, “O son of Khazib! when thou wakest from thy sleep dig under thy feet and thou shalt find a bow of brass and three leaden arrows, inscribed with talismans and characts. Take the bow and shoot the arrows at the horseman on the dome-top and free mankind from this sore calamity. When thou hast shot him he shall fall into the sea, and the horse will also drop at thy feet: then bury it in the place of the bow. This done, the main will swell and rise till it is level with the mountain-head, and there will appear on it a skiff carrying a man of laton (other than he thou shalt have shot) holding in his hand a pair of paddles. He will come to thee and do thou embark with him but beware of saying Bismillah or of otherwise naming Allah Almighty. He will row thee for a space of ten days, till he bring thee to certain Islands called the Islands of Safety, and thence thou shalt easily reach a port and find those who will convey thee to thy native land; and all this shall be fulfilled to thee so thou call not on the name of Allah.” Then I started up from my sleep in joy and gladness and, hastening to do the bidding of the mysterious Voice, found the bow and arrows and shot at the horseman and tumbled him into the main, whilst the horse dropped at my feet; so I took it and buried it. Presently the sea surged up and rose till it reached the top of the mountain; nor had I long to wait ere I saw a skiff in the offing coming towards me. I gave thanks to Allah; and, when the skiff came up to me, I saw therein a man of brass with a tablet of lead on his breast inscribed with talismans and characts; and I embarked without uttering a word. The boatman rowed on with me through the first day and the second and the third, in all ten whole days, till I caught sight of the Islands of Safety; whereat I joyed with exceeding joy and for stress of gladness exclaimed, “Allah! Allah! In the name of Allah! There is no god but <em>the</em> God and Allah is Almighty.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-263" id="noteref-263" epub:type="noteref">263</a> Thereupon the skiff forthwith upset and cast me upon the sea; then it righted and sank deep into the depths. Now I am a fair swimmer, so I swam the whole day till nightfall, when my forearms and shoulders were numbed with fatigue and I felt like to die; so I testified to my Faith, expecting naught but death. The sea was still surging under the violence of the winds, and presently there came a billow like a hillock; and, bearing me up high in air, threw me with a long cast on dry land, that His will might be fulfilled. I crawled up the beach and doffing my raiment wrung it out to dry and spread it in the sunshine: then I lay me down and slept the whole night. As soon as it was day, I donned my clothes and rose to look whither I should walk. Presently I came to a thicket of low trees; and, making a cast round it, found that the spot whereon I stood was an islet, a mere holm, girt on all sides by the ocean; whereupon I said to myself, “Whatso freeth me from one great calamity casteth me into a greater!” But while I was pondering my case and longing for death behold, I saw afar off a ship making for the island; so I clomb a tree and hid myself among the branches. Presently the ship anchored and landed ten slaves, blackamoors, bearing iron hoes and baskets, who walked on till they reached the middle of the island. Here they dug deep into the ground, until they uncovered a plate of metal which they lifted, thereby opening a trap-door. After this they returned to the ship and thence brought bread and flour, honey and fruits, clarified butter,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-264" id="noteref-264" epub:type="noteref">264</a> leather bottles containing liquors and many household stuffs; also furniture, table-service and mirrors; rugs, carpets and in fact all needed to furnish a dwelling; and they kept going to and fro, and descending by the trap-door, till they had transported into the dwelling all that was in the ship. After this the slaves again went on board and brought back with them garments as rich as may be, and in the midst of them came an old old man, of whom very little was left, for Time had dealt hardly and harshly with him, and all that remained of him was a bone wrapped in a rag of blue stuff, through which the winds whistled west and east. As saith the poet of him:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<span>Time gars me tremble Ah, how sore the baulk!</span>
							<span>✿ While Time in pride of strength doth ever stalk:</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>Time was I walked nor ever felt I tired,</span>
							<span>✿ Now am I tired albe I never walk!</span>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">And the Shaykh held by the hand a youth cast in beauty’s mould, all elegance and perfect grace; so fair that his comeliness deserved to be proverbial; for he was as a green bough or the tender young of the roe, ravishing every heart with his loveliness and subduing every soul with his coquetry and amorous ways.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-265" id="noteref-265" epub:type="noteref">265</a> It was of him the poet spake when he said:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<span>Beauty they brought with him to make compare;</span>
							<span>✿ But Beauty hung her head in shame and care:</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>Quoth they, “O Beauty, hast thou seen his like?”</span>
							<span>✿ And Beauty cried, “His like? not anywhere!”</span>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">They stinted not their going, O my lady, till all went down by the trap-door and did not reappear for an hour, or rather more; at the end of which time the slaves and the old man came up without the youth and, replacing the iron plate and carefully closing the door-slab, as it was before, they returned to the ship and made sail and were lost to my sight. When they turned away to depart, I came down from the tree and, going to the place I had seen them fill up, scraped off and removed the earth; and in patience possessed my soul till I had cleared the whole of it away. Then appeared the trap-door which was of wood, in shape and size like a millstone; and when I lifted it up it disclosed a winding staircase of stone. At this I marvelled and, descending the steps till I reached the last, found a fair hall, spread with various kinds of carpets and silk stuffs, wherein was a youth sitting upon a raised couch and leaning back on a round cushion with a fan in his hand and nosegays and posies of sweet scented herbs and flowers before him;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-266" id="noteref-266" epub:type="noteref">266</a> but he was alone and not a soul near him in the great vault. When he saw me he turned pale; but I saluted him courteously and said, “Set thy mind at ease and calm thy fears; no harm shall come near thee; I am a man like thyself and the son of a King to boot; whom the decrees of Destiny have sent to bear thee company and cheer thee in thy loneliness. But now tell me, what is thy story and what causeth thee to dwell thus in solitude under the ground?” When he was assured that I was of his kind and no Jinni, he rejoiced and his fine colour returned; and, making me draw near to him he said, “O my brother, my story is a strange story and ’tis this. My father is a merchant-jeweller possessed of great wealth, who hath white and black slaves travelling and trading on his account in ships and on camels, and trafficking with the most distant cities; but he was not blessed with a child, not even one. Now on a certain night he dreamed a dream that he should be favoured with a son, who would be short lived; so the morning dawned on my father bringing him woe and weeping. On the following night my mother conceived and my father noted down the date of her becoming pregnant.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-267" id="noteref-267" epub:type="noteref">267</a> Her time being fulfilled she bare me; whereat my father rejoiced and made banquets and called together the neighbours and fed the Fakirs and the poor, for that he had been blessed with issue near the end of his days. Then he assembled the astrologers and astronomers who knew the places of the planets, and the wizards and wise ones of the time, and men learned in horoscopes and nativities;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-268" id="noteref-268" epub:type="noteref">268</a> and they drew out my birth scheme and said to my father:⁠—Thy son shall live to fifteen years, but in his fifteenth there is a sinister aspect; an he safely tide it over he shall attain a great age. And the cause that threateneth him with death is this. In the Sea of Peril standeth the Mountain Magnet hight; on whose summit is a horseman of yellow laton seated on a horse also of brass and bearing on his breast a tablet of lead. Fifty days after this rider shall fall from his steed thy son will die and his slayer will be he who shoots down the horseman, a Prince named Ajib son of King Khazib. My father grieved with exceeding grief to hear these words; but reared me in tenderest fashion and educated me excellently well till my fifteenth year was told. Ten days ago news came to him that the horseman had fallen into the sea and he who shot him down was named Ajib son of King Khazib. My father thereupon wept bitter tears at the need of parting with me and became like one possessed of a Jinni. However, being in mortal fear for me, he built me this place under the earth; and, stocking it with all required for the few days still remaining, he brought me hither in a ship and left me here. Ten are already past and, when the forty shall have gone by without danger to me, he will come and take me away; for he hath done all this only in fear of Prince Ajib. Such, then, is my story and the cause of my loneliness.” When I heard his history I marvelled and said in my mind, “I am the Prince Ajib who hath done all this; but as Allah is with me I will surely not slay him!” So said I to him, O my lord, far from thee be this hurt and harm and then, please Allah, thou shalt not suffer cark nor care nor aught disquietude, for I will tarry with thee and serve thee as a servant, and then wend my ways; and, after having borne thee company during the forty days, I will go with thee to thy home where thou shalt give me an escort of some of thy Mamelukes with whom I may journey back to my own city; and the Almighty shall requite thee for me. He was glad to hear these words, when I rose and lighted a large wax-candle and trimmed the lamps and the three lanterns; and I set on meat and drink and sweetmeats. We ate and drank and sat talking over various matters till the greater part of the night was gone; when he lay down to rest and I covered him up and went to sleep myself. Next morning I arose and warmed a little water, then lifted him gently so as to awake him and brought him the warm water wherewith he washed his face<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-269" id="noteref-269" epub:type="noteref">269</a> and said to me, “Heaven requite thee for me with every blessing, O youth! By Allah, if I get quit of this danger and am saved from him whose name is Ajib bin Khazib, I will make my father reward thee and send thee home healthy and wealthy; and, if I die, then my blessing be upon thee.” I answered, “May the day never dawn on which evil shall betide thee; and may Allah make my last day before thy last day!” Then I set before him somewhat of food and we ate; and I got ready perfumes for fumigating the hall, wherewith he was pleased. Moreover I made him a Mankalah-cloth;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-270" id="noteref-270" epub:type="noteref">270</a> and we played and ate sweetmeats and we played again and took our pleasure till nightfall, when I rose and lighted the lamps, and set before him somewhat to eat, and sat telling him stories till the hours of darkness were far spent. Then he lay down to rest and I covered him up and rested also. And thus I continued to do, O my lady for days and nights, and affection for him took root in my heart and my sorrow was eased, and I said to myself, The astrologers lied<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-271" id="noteref-271" epub:type="noteref">271</a> when they predicted that he should be slain by Ajib bin Khazib: by Allah, I will not slay him. I ceased not ministering to him and conversing and carousing with him and telling him all manner tales for thirty-nine days. On the fortieth night<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-272" id="noteref-272" epub:type="noteref">272</a> the youth rejoiced and said, “O my brother, Alhamdolillah!⁠—praise be to Allah⁠—who hath preserved me from death and this is by thy blessing and the blessing of thy coming to me; and I pray God that He restore thee to thy native land. But now, O my brother, I would thou warm me some water for the Ghusl-ablution and do thou kindly bathe me and change my clothes.” I replied, “With love and gladness;” and I heated water in plenty and carrying it in to him washed his body all over, the washing of health,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-273" id="noteref-273" epub:type="noteref">273</a> with meal of lupins<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-274" id="noteref-274" epub:type="noteref">274</a> and rubbed him well and changed his clothes and spread him a high bed whereon he lay down to rest, being drowsy after bathing. Then said he, “O my brother, cut me up a water-melon, and sweeten it with a little sugar-candy.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-275" id="noteref-275" epub:type="noteref">275</a> So I went to the store-room and bringing out a fine water-melon I found there, set it on a platter and laid it before him saying, “O my master hast thou not a knife?” “Here it is,” answered he, “over my head upon the high shelf.” So I got up in haste and taking the knife drew it from its sheath; but my foot slipped in stepping down and I fell heavily upon the youth holding in my hand the knife which hastened to fulfil what had been written on the Day that decided the destinies of man, and buried itself, as if planted, in the youth’s heart. He died on the instant. When I saw that he was slain and knew that I had slain him, maugre myself, I cried out with an exceeding loud and bitter cry and beat my face and rent my raiment and said, “Verily we be Allah’s and unto Him we be returning, O Moslems! O folk fain of Allah! there remained for this youth but one day of the forty dangerous days which the astrologers and the learned had foretold for him; and the predestined death of this beautiful one was to be at my hand. Would Heaven I had not tried to cut the water-melon. What dire misfortune is this I must bear lief or loath? What a disaster! What an affliction! O Allah mine, I implore thy pardon and declare to Thee my innocence of his death. But what God willeth let that come to pass.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-276" id="noteref-276" epub:type="noteref">276</a>⁠⸺⁠And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.</p>
				<p><span class="night-announcement">Now when it was the Sixteenth Night,</span> She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that Ajib thus continued his tale to the lady:⁠—When I was certified that I had slain him, I arose and ascending the stairs replaced the trap-door and covered it with earth as before. Then I looked out seawards and saw the ship cleaving the waters and making for the island, wherefore I was afeard and said, “The moment they come and see the youth done to death, they will know ’twas I who slew him and will slay me without respite.” So I climbed up into a high tree and concealed myself among its leaves; and hardly had I done so when the ship anchored and the slaves landed with the ancient man, the youth’s father, and made direct for the place and when they removed the earth they were surprised to see it soft.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-277" id="noteref-277" epub:type="noteref">277</a> Then they raised the trap-door and went down and found the youth lying at full length, clothed in fair new garments with a face beaming after the bath, and the knife deep in his heart. At the sight they shrieked and wept and beat their faces, loudly cursing the murderer; whilst a swoon came over the Shaykh so that the slaves deemed him dead, unable to survive his son. At last they wrapped the slain youth in his clothes and carried him up and laid him on the ground covering him with a shroud of silk. Whilst they were making for the ship the old man revived; and, gazing on his son who was stretched out, fell on the ground and strewed dust over his head and smote his face and plucked out his beard; and his weeping redoubled as he thought of his murdered son and he swooned away once more. After awhile a slave went and fetched a strip of silk whereupon they lay the old man and sat down at his head. All this took place and I was on the tree above them watching everything that came to pass; and my heart became hoary before my head waxed grey, for the hard lot which was mine, and for the distress and anguish I had undergone, and I fell to reciting:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<span>“How many a joy by Allah’s will hath fled</span>
							<span>✿ With flight escaping sight of wisest head!</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>How many a sadness shall begin the day,</span>
							<span>✿ Yet grow right gladsome ere the day is sped!</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>How many a weal trips on the heels of ill,</span>
							<span>✿ Causing the mourner’s heart with joy to thrill!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-278" id="noteref-278" epub:type="noteref">278</a></span>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">But the old man, O my lady, ceased not from his swoon till near sunset, when he came to himself and, looking upon his dead son, he recalled what had happened, and how what he had dreaded had come to pass; and he beat his face and head and recited these couplets:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“Racked is my heart by parting fro’ my friends ✿ And two rills ever fro’ my eyelids flow:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With them<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-279" id="noteref-279" epub:type="noteref">279</a> went forth my hopes, Ah, well away! ✿ What shift remaineth me to say or do?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would I had never looked upon their sight, ✿ What shift, fair sirs, when paths e’er straiter grow?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>What charm shall calm my pangs when this wise burn ✿ Longings of love which in my vitals glow?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Would I had trod with them the road of Death! ✿ Ne’er had befel us twain this parting-blow:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Allah: I pray the Ruthful show me ruth ✿ And mix our lives nor part them evermo’e!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>How blest were we as ’neath one roof we dwelt ✿ Conjoined in joys nor recking aught of woe;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Till Fortune shot us with the severance shaft; ✿ Ah who shall patient bear such parting throe?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And dart of Death struck down amid the tribe ✿ The age’s pearl that Morn saw brightest show:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I cried the while his case took speech and said:⁠—✿ Would Heaven, my son, Death mote his doom foreslow!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Which be the readiest road wi’ thee to meet ✿ My Son! for whom I would my soul bestow?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>If sun I call him no! the sun doth set; ✿ If moon I call him, wane the moons; Ah no!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>O sad mischance o’ thee, O doom of days, ✿ Thy place none other love shall ever know:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy sire distracted sees thee, but despairs ✿ By wit or wisdom Fate to overthrow:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Some evil eye this day hath cast its spell ✿ And foul befal him as it foul befel!”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">Then he sobbed a single sob and his soul fled his flesh. The slaves shrieked aloud “Alas, our lord!” and showered dust on their heads and redoubled their weeping and wailing. Presently they carried their dead master to the ship side by side with his dead son and, having transported all the stuff from the dwelling to the vessel, set sail and disappeared from mine eyes. I descended from the tree and, raising the trap-door, went down into the underground dwelling where everything reminded me of the youth; and I looked upon the poor remains of him and began repeating these verses:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Their tracks I see, and pine with pain and pang ✿ And on deserted hearths I weep and yearn:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And Him I pray who doomèd them depart ✿ Some day vouchsafe the boon of safe return.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-280" id="noteref-280" epub:type="noteref">280</a></span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">Then, O my lady, I went up again by the trap-door, and every day I used to wander round about the island and every night I returned to the underground hall. Thus I lived for a month, till at last, looking at the western side of the island, I observed that every day the tide ebbed, leaving shallow water for which the flow did not compensate; and by the end of the month the sea showed dry land in that direction. At this I rejoiced making certain of my safety; so I arose and fording what little was left of the water got me to the main land, where I fell in with great heaps of loose sand in which even a camel’s hoof would sink up to the knee.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-281" id="noteref-281" epub:type="noteref">281</a> However I emboldened my soul and wading through the sand behold, a fire shone from afar burning with a blazing light.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-282" id="noteref-282" epub:type="noteref">282</a> So I made for it hoping haply to find succour and broke out into these verses:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“Belike my Fortune may her bridle turn ✿ And Time bring weal although he’s jealous hight;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forward my hopes, and further all my needs, ✿ And passèd ills with present weals requite.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">And when I drew near the fire aforesaid lo! it was a palace with gates of copper burnished red which, when the rising sun shone thereon, gleamed and glistened from afar showing what had seemed to me a fire. I rejoiced in the sight, and sat down over against the gate, but I was hardly settled in my seat before there met me ten young men clothed in sumptuous gear and all were blind of the left eye which appeared as plucked out. They were accompanied by a Shaykh, an old, old man, and much I marvelled at their appearance, and their all being blind of the same eye. When they saw me, they saluted me with the Salam and asked me of my case and my history; whereupon I related to them all what had befallen me, and what full measure of misfortune was mine. Marvelling at my tale they took me to the mansion, where I saw ranged round the hall ten couches each with its blue bedding and coverlet of blue stuff<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-283" id="noteref-283" epub:type="noteref">283</a> and amiddlemost stood a smaller couch furnished like them with blue and nothing else. As we entered each of the youths took his seat on his own couch and the old man seated himself upon the smaller one in the middle saying to me, “O youth, sit thee down on the floor and ask not of our case nor of the loss of our eyes.” Presently he rose up and set before each young man some meat in a charger and drink in a large mazer, treating me in like manner; and after that they sat questioning me concerning my adventures and what had betided me: and I kept telling them my tale till the night was far spent. Then said the young men, “O our Shaykh, wilt not thou set before us our ordinary? The time is come.” He replied, “With love and gladness,” and rose and entering a closet disappeared, but presently returned bearing on his head ten trays each covered with a strip of blue stuff. He set a tray before each, youth and, lighting ten wax candles, he stuck one upon each tray, and drew off the covers and lo! under them was naught but ashes and powdered charcoal and kettle soot. Then all the young men tucked up their sleeves to the elbows and fell a-weeping and wailing and they blackened their faces and smeared their clothes and buffetted their brows and beat their breasts, continually exclaiming, “We were sitting at our ease but our frowardness brought us unease!” They ceased not to do thus till dawn drew nigh, when the old man rose and heated water for them; and they washed their faces, and donned other and clean clothes. Now when I saw this, O my lady, for very wonderment my senses left me and my wits went wild and heart and head were full of thought, till I forgot what had betided me and I could not keep silence feeling I fain must speak out and question them of these strangenesses; so I said to them, “How come ye to do this after we have been so open-hearted and frolicksome? Thanks be to Allah ye be all sound and sane, yet actions such as these befit none but mad men or those possessed of an evil spirit. I conjure you by all that is dearest to you, why stint ye to tell me your history, and the cause of your losing your eyes and your blackening your faces with ashes and soot?” Hereupon they turned to me and said, “O young man, hearken not to thy youthtide’s suggestions and question us no questions.” Then they slept and I with them and when they awoke the old man brought us somewhat of food; and, after we had eaten and the plates and goblets had been removed, they sat conversing till nightfall when the old man rose and lit the wax candles and lamps and set meat and drink before us. After we had eaten and drunken we sat conversing and carousing in companionage till the noon of night, when they said to the old man, “Bring us our ordinary, for the hour of sleep is at hand!” So he rose and brought them the trays of soot and ashes; and they did as they had done on the preceding night, nor more, nor less. I abode with them after this fashion for the space of a month during which time they used to blacken their faces with ashes every night, and to wash and change their raiment when the morn was young; and I but marvelled the more and my scruples and curiosity increased to such a point that I had to forego even food and drink. At last, I lost command of myself, for my heart was aflame with fire unquenchable and lowe unconcealable and I said, “O young men, will ye not relieve my trouble and acquaint me with the reason of thus blackening your faces and the meaning of your words:⁠—We were sitting at our ease but our frowardness brought us unease?” Quoth they “ ’Twere better to keep these things secret.” Still I was bewildered by their doings to the point of abstaining from eating and drinking and, at last wholly losing patience, quoth I to them, “There is no help for it: ye must acquaint me with what is the reason of these doings.” They replied, “We kept our secret only for thy good: to gratify thee will bring down evil upon thee and thou wilt become a monocular even as we are.” I repeated, “There is no help for it and, if ye will not, let me leave you and return to mine own people and be at rest from seeing these things, for the proverb saith:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Better ye ’bide and I take my leave: ✿ For what eye sees not heart shall never grieve.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">Thereupon they said to me, “Remember, O youth, that should ill befal thee we will not again harbour thee nor suffer thee to abide amongst us;” and bringing a ram they slaughtered it and skinned it. Lastly they gave me a knife saying, “Take this skin and stretch thyself upon it and we will sew it around thee; presently there shall come to thee a certain bird, hight Rukh,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-284" id="noteref-284" epub:type="noteref">284</a> that will catch thee up in his pounces and tower high in air and then set thee down on a mountain. When thou feelest he is no longer flying, rip open the pelt with this blade and come out of it; the bird will be scared and will fly away and leave thee free. After this fare for half a day, and the march will place thee at a palace wondrous fair to behold, towering high in air and builded of Khalanj,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-285" id="noteref-285" epub:type="noteref">285</a> lign-aloes and sandal-wood, plated with red gold, and studded with all manner emeralds and costly gems fit for seal-rings. Enter it and thou shalt win to thy wish for we have all entered that palace; and such is the cause of our losing our eyes and of our blackening our faces. Were we now to tell thee our stories it would take too long a time; for each and every of us lost his left eye by an adventure of his own.” I rejoiced at their words and they did with me as they said; and the bird Rukh bore me off and set me down on the mountain. Then I came out of the skin and walked on till I reached the palace. The door stood open as I entered and found myself in a spacious and goodly hall, wide exceedingly, even as a horse-course; and around it were an hundred chambers with doors of sandal and aloes woods plated with red gold and furnished with silver rings by way of knockers.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-286" id="noteref-286" epub:type="noteref">286</a> At the head or upper end<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-287" id="noteref-287" epub:type="noteref">287</a> of the hall I saw forty damsels, sumptuously dressed and ornamented and one and all bright as moons; none could ever tire of gazing upon them and all so lovely that the most ascetic devotee on seeing them would become their slave and obey their will. When they saw me the whole bevy came up to me and said “Welcome and well come and good cheer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-288" id="noteref-288" epub:type="noteref">288</a> to thee, O our lord! This whole month have we been expecting thee. Praised be Allah who hath sent us one who is worthy of us, even as we are worthy of him!” Then they made me sit down upon a high divan and said to me, “This day thou art our lord and master, and we are thy servants and thy handmaids, so order us as thou wilt.” And I marvelled at their case. Presently one of them arose and set meat before me and I ate and they ate with me; whilst others warmed water and washed my hands and feet and changed my clothes, and others made ready sherbets and gave us to drink; and all gathered around me being full of joy and gladness at my coming. Then they sat down and conversed with me till nightfall, when five of them arose and laid the trays and spread them with flowers and fragrant herbs and fruits, fresh and dried, and confections in profusion. At last they brought out a fine wine-service with rich old wine; and we sat down to drink and some sang songs and others played the lute and psaltery and recorders and other instruments, and the bowl went merrily round. Hereupon such gladness possessed me that I forgot the sorrows of the world one and all and said, “This is indeed life; O sad that ’tis fleeting!” I enjoyed their company till the time came for rest; and our heads were all warm with wine, when they said, “O our lord, choose from amongst us her who shall be thy bed-fellow this night and not lie with thee again till forty days be past.” So I chose a girl fair of face and perfect in shape, with eyes Kohl-edged by nature’s hand;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-289" id="noteref-289" epub:type="noteref">289</a> hair long and jet black with slightly parted teeth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-290" id="noteref-290" epub:type="noteref">290</a> and joining brows: ’twas as if she were some limber graceful branchlet or the slender stalk of sweet basil to amaze and to bewilder man’s fancy; even as the poet said of such an one:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>To even her with greeny bough were vain ✿ Fool he who finds her beauties in the roe:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>When hath the roe those lively lovely limbs ✿ Or honey dews those lips alone bestow?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Those eyne, soul-piercing eyne, which slay with love, ✿ Which bind the victim by their shafts laid low?</span>
						<br/>
						<span>My heart to second childhood they beguiled ✿ No wonder: love-sick man again is child!</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">And I repeated to her the maker’s words who said:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>None other charms but thine shall greet mine eyes, ✿ Nor other image can my heart surprize:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thy love, my lady, captives all my thoughts ✿ And on that love I’ll die and I’ll arise.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">So I lay with her that night; none fairer I ever knew; and, when it was morning, the damsels carried me to the Hammam-bath and bathed me and robed me in fairest apparel. Then they served up food, and we ate and drank and the cup went round till nightfall when I chose from among them one fair of form and face, soft-sided and a model of grace, such an one as the poet described when he said:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>On her fair bosom caskets twain I scanned, ✿ Sealed fast with musk-seals lovers to withstand;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With arrowy glances stand on guard her eyes, ✿ Whose shafts would shoot who dares put forth a hand.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">With her I spent a most goodly night; and, to be brief, O my mistress, I remained with them in all solace and delight of life, eating and drinking, conversing and carousing and every night lying with one or other of them. But at the head of the new year they came to me in tears and bade me farewell, weeping and crying out and clinging about me; whereat I wondered and said, “What may be the matter? verily you break my heart!” They exclaimed, “Would Heaven we had never known thee; for, though we have companied with many, yet never saw we a pleasanter than thou or a more courteous.” And they wept again. “But tell me more clearly,” asked I, “what causeth this weeping which maketh my gall-bladder<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-291" id="noteref-291" epub:type="noteref">291</a> like to burst;” and they answered, “O our lord and master, it is severance which maketh us weep; and thou, and thou only, art the cause of our tears. If thou hearken to us we need never be parted and if thou hearken not we part for ever; but our hearts tell us that thou wilt not listen to our words and this is the cause of our tears and cries.” “Tell me how the case standeth?” “Know, O our lord, that we are the daughters of Kings who have met here and have lived together for years; and once in every year we are perforce absent for forty days and afterwards we return and abide here for the rest of the twelvemonth eating and drinking and taking our pleasure and enjoying delights: we are about to depart according to our custom; and we fear lest after we be gone thou contraire our charge and disobey our injunctions. Here now we commit to thee the keys of the palace which containeth forty chambers and thou mayest open of these thirty and nine, but beware (and we conjure thee by Allah and by the lives of us!) lest thou open the fortieth door, for therein is that which shall separate us for ever.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-292" id="noteref-292" epub:type="noteref">292</a> Quoth I, “Assuredly I will not open it, if it contain the cause of severance from you.” Then one among them came up to me and falling on my neck wept and recited these verses:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“If Time unite us after absent-while, ✿ The world harsh frowning on our lot shall smile;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And if thy semblance deign adorn mine eyes,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-293" id="noteref-293" epub:type="noteref">293</a> ✿ I’ll pardon Time past wrongs and by-gone guile.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">And I recited the following:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>“When drew she near to bid adieu with heart unstrung, ✿ While care and longing on that day her bosom wrung;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Wet pearls she wept and mine like red carnelians rolled ✿ And, joined in sad <i xml:lang="fr">rivière</i>, around her neck they hung.”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">When I saw her weeping I said, “By Allah I will never open that fortieth door, never and no wise!” and I bade her farewell. Thereupon all departed flying away like birds; signalling with their hands farewells as they went and leaving me alone in the palace. When evening drew near I opened the door of the first chamber and entering it found myself in a place like one of the pleasaunces of Paradise. It was a garden with trees of freshest green and ripe fruits of yellow sheen; and its birds were singing clear and keen and rills ran wimpling through the fair terrene. The sight and sounds brought solace to my sprite; and I walked among the trees, and I smelt the breath of the flowers on the breeze; and heard the birdies sing their melodies hymning the One, the Almighty in sweetest litanies; and I looked upon the apple whose hue is parcel red and parcel yellow; as said the poet:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Apple whose hue combines in union mellow ✿ My fair’s red cheek, her hapless lover’s yellow.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">Then I looked upon the quince, and inhaled its fragrance which putteth to shame musk and ambergris, even as the poet hath said:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Quince every taste conjoins; in her are found ✿ Gifts which for queen of fruits the Quince have crowned;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Her taste is wine, her scent the waft of musk; ✿ Pure gold her hue, her shape the Moon’s fair round.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">Then I looked upon the pear whose taste surpasseth sherbet and sugar; and the apricot<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-294" id="noteref-294" epub:type="noteref">294</a> whose beauty striketh the eye with admiration, as if she were a polished ruby. Then I went out of the place and locked the door as it was before. When it was the morrow I opened the second door; and entering found myself in a spacious plain set with tall date-palms and watered by a running stream whose banks were shrubbed with bushes of rose and jasmine, while privet and eglantine, oxe-eye, violet and lily, narcissus, origane and the winter gilliflower carpeted the borders; and the breath of the breeze swept over these sweet-smelling growths diffusing their delicious odours right and left, perfuming the world and filling my soul with delight. After taking my pleasure there awhile I went from it and, having closed the door as it was before, opened the third door wherein I saw a high open hall pargetted with particoloured marbles and <i xml:lang="it">pietra dura</i> of price and other precious stones, and hung with cages of sandal-wood and eagle-wood; full of birds which made sweet music, such as the “Thousand-voiced,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-295" id="noteref-295" epub:type="noteref">295</a> and the cushat, the merle, the turtle-dove and the Nubian ring-dove. My heart was filled with pleasure thereby; my grief was dispelled and I slept in that aviary till dawn. Then I unlocked the door of the fourth chamber and therein found a grand saloon with forty smaller chambers giving upon it. All their doors stood open: so I entered and found them full of pearls and jacinths and beryls and emeralds and corals and carbuncles, and all manner precious gems and jewels, such as tongue of man may not describe. My thought was stunned at the sight and I said to myself, “These be things methinks united which could not be found save in the treasuries of a King of Kings, nor could the monarchs of the world have collected the like of these!” And my heart dilated and my sorrows ceased, “For,” quoth I, “now verily am I the monarch of the age, since by Allah’s grace this enormous wealth is mine; and I have forty damsels under my hand nor is there any to claim them save myself.” Then I gave not over opening place after place until nine and thirty days were passed and in that time I had entered every chamber except that one whose door the Princesses had charged me not to open. But my thoughts, O my mistress, ever ran on that forbidden fortieth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-296" id="noteref-296" epub:type="noteref">296</a> and Satan urged me to open it for my own undoing; nor had I patience to forbear, albeit there wanted of the trysting time but a single day. So I stood before the chamber aforesaid and, after a moment’s hesitation, opened the door which was plated with red gold, and entered. I was met by a perfume whose like I had never before smelt; and so sharp and subtle was the odour that it made my senses drunken as with strong wine, and I fell to the ground in a fainting fit which lasted a full hour. When I came to myself I strengthened my heart and, entering, found myself in a chamber whose floor was bespread with saffron and blazing with light from branched candelabra of gold and lamps fed with costly oils, which diffused the scent of musk and ambergris. I saw there also two great censers each big as a mazer-bowl,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-297" id="noteref-297" epub:type="noteref">297</a> flaming with lign-aloes, nadd-perfume,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-298" id="noteref-298" epub:type="noteref">298</a> ambergris and honied scents; and the place was full of their fragrance. Presently, O my lady, I espied a noble steed, black as the murks of night when murkiest, standing, ready saddled and bridled (and his saddle was of red gold) before two mangers, one of clear crystal wherein was husked sesame, and the other also of crystal containing water of the rose scented with musk. When I saw this I marvelled and said to myself, “Doubtless in this animal must be some wondrous mystery;” and Satan cozened me, so I led him without the palace and mounted him; but he would not stir from his place. So I hammered his sides with my heels, but he moved not, and then I took the rein-whip<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-299" id="noteref-299" epub:type="noteref">299</a> and struck him withal. When he felt the blow, he neighed a neigh with a sound like deafening thunder and, opening a pair of wings<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-300" id="noteref-300" epub:type="noteref">300</a> flew up with me in the firmament of heaven far beyond the eyesight of man. After a full hour of flight he descended and alighted on a terrace roof and shaking me off his back lashed me on the face with his tail and gouged out my left eye causing it roll along my cheek. Then he flew away. I went down from the terrace and found myself again amongst the ten one-eyed youths sitting upon their ten couches with blue covers; and they cried out when they saw me, “No welcome to thee, nor aught of good cheer! We all lived of lives the happiest and we ate and drank of the best; upon brocades and cloths of gold we took our rest, and we slept with our heads on beauty’s breast, but we could not await one day to gain the delights of a year!” Quoth I, “Behold I have become one like unto you and now I would have you bring me a tray full of blackness, wherewith to blacken my face, and receive me into your society.” “No, by Allah,” quoth they, “thou shalt not sojourn with us and now get thee hence!” So they drove me away. Finding them reject me thus I foresaw that matters would go hard with me, and I remembered the many miseries which Destiny had written upon my forehead; and I fared forth from among them heavy-hearted and tearful-eyed, repeating to myself these words, “I was sitting at mine ease but my frowardness brought me to unease.” Then I shaved beard and mustachios and eyebrows, renouncing the world, and wandered in Kalandar-garb about Allah’s earth; and the Almighty decreed safety for me till I arrived at Baghdad, which was on the evening of this very night. Here I met these two other Kalandars standing bewildered; so I saluted them saying, “I am a stranger!” and they answered, “And we likewise be strangers!” By the freak of Fortune we were like to like, three Kalandars and three monoculars all blind of the left eye. Such, O my lady, is the cause of the shearing of my beard and the manner of my losing an eye. Said the lady to him, “Rub thy head and wend thy ways;” but he answered, “By Allah, I will not go until I hear the stories of these others.” Then the lady, turning towards the Caliph and Jaʼafar and Masrur, said to them, “Do ye also give an account of yourselves, you men!” Whereupon Jaʼafar stood forth and told her what he had told the portress as they were entering the house; and when she heard his story of their being merchants and Mosul-men who had outrun the watch, she said, “I grant you your lives each for each sake, and now away with you all.” So they all went out and when they were in the street, quoth the Caliph to the Kalandars, “O company, whither go ye now, seeing that the morning hath not yet dawned?” Quoth they, “By Allah, O our lord, we know not where to go.” “Come and pass the rest of the night with us,” said the Caliph and, turning to Jaʼafar, “Take them home with thee and to-morrow bring them to my presence that we may chronicle their adventures.” Jaʼafar did as the Caliph bade him and the Commander of the Faithful returned to his palace; but sleep gave no sign of visiting him that night and he lay awake pondering the mishaps of the three Kalandar-princes and impatient to know the history of the ladies and the two black bitches. No sooner had morning dawned than he went forth and sat upon the throne of his sovereignty; and, turning to Jaʼafar, after all his Grandees and Officers of state were gathered together, he said, “Bring me the three ladies and the two bitches and the three Kalandars.” So Jaʼafar fared forth and brought them all before him (and the ladies were veiled); then the Minister turned to them and said in the Caliph’s name, “We pardon you your maltreatment of us and your want of courtesy, in consideration of the kindness which forewent it, and for that ye knew us not: now however I would have you to know that ye stand in presence of the fifth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-301" id="noteref-301" epub:type="noteref">301</a> of the sons of Abbas, Harun al-Rashid, brother of Caliph Músá al-Hádi, son of Al-Mansúr; son of Mohammed the brother of Al-Saffáh bin Mohammed who was first of the royal house. Speak ye therefore before him the truth and the whole truth!” When the ladies heard Jaʼafar’s words touching the Commander of the Faithful, the eldest came forward and said, “O Prince of True Believers, my story is one which, were it graven with needle-gravers upon the eye-corners were a warner for whoso would be warned and an example for whoso can take profit from example.”⁠⸺⁠And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.</p>
				<p><span class="night-announcement">Now when it was the Seventeenth Night,</span> She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that she stood forth before the Commander of the Faithful and began to tell</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-1-4-5" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h4 epub:type="title">The Eldest Lady’s Tale</h4>
				<p>Verily a strange tale is mine and ’tis this:⁠—Yon two black bitches are my eldest sisters by one mother and father; and these two others, she who beareth upon her the signs of stripes and the third our procuratrix are my sisters by another mother. When my father died, each took her share of the heritage and, after a while my mother also deceased, leaving me and my sisters-german three thousand dinars; so each daughter received her portion of a thousand dinars and I the same, albe the youngest. In due course of time my sisters married with the usual festivities and lived with their husbands, who bought merchandise with their wives’ monies and set out on their travels together. Thus they threw me off. My brothers-in-law were absent with their wives five years, during which period they spent all the money they had and, becoming bankrupt, deserted my sisters in foreign parts amid stranger folk. After five years my eldest sister returned to me in beggar’s gear with her clothes in rags and tatters<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-302" id="noteref-302" epub:type="noteref">302</a> and a dirty old mantilla;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-303" id="noteref-303" epub:type="noteref">303</a> and truly she was in the foulest and sorriest plight. At first sight I did not know my own sister; but presently I recognised her and said “What state is this?” “O our sister,” she replied, “Words cannot undo the done; and the reed of Destiny hath run through what Allah decreed.” Then I sent her to the bath and dressed her in a suit of mine own, and boiled for her a bouillon and brought her some good wine and said to her, “O my sister, thou art the eldest, who still standest to us in the stead of father and mother; and, as for the inheritance which came to me as to you twain, Allah hath blessed it and prospered it to me with increase; and my circumstances are easy, for I have made much money by spinning and cleaning silk; and I and you will share my wealth alike.” I entreated her with all kindliness and she abode with me a whole year, during which our thoughts and fancies were always full of our other sister. Shortly after she too came home in yet fouler and sorrier plight than that of my eldest sister; and I dealt by her still more honorably than I had done by the first, and each of them had a share of my substance. After a time they said to me, “O our sister, we desire to marry again, for indeed we have not patience to drag on our days without husbands and to lead the lives of widows bewitched;” and I replied, “O eyes of me!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-304" id="noteref-304" epub:type="noteref">304</a> ye have hitherto seen scanty weal in wedlock, for now-a-days good men and true are become rareties and curiosities; nor do I deem your projects advisable, as ye have already made trial of matrimony and have failed.” But they would not accept my advice and married without my consent: nevertheless I gave them outfit and dowries out of my money; and they fared forth with their mates. In a mighty little time their husbands played them false and, taking whatever they could lay hands upon, levanted and left them in the lurch. Thereupon they came to me ashamed and in abject case and made their excuses to me, saying, “Pardon our fault and be not wroth with us;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-305" id="noteref-305" epub:type="noteref">305</a> for although thou art younger in years yet art thou older in wit; henceforth we will never make mention of marriage; so take us back as thy handmaidens that we may eat our mouthful.” Quoth I, “Welcome to you, O my sisters, there is naught dearer to me than you.” And I took them in and redoubled my kindness to them. We ceased not to live after this loving fashion for a full year, when I resolved to sell my wares abroad and first to fit me a conveyance for Bassorah; so I equipped a large ship, and loaded her with merchandise and valuable goods for traffic, and with provaunt and all needful for a voyage, and said to my sisters, “Will ye abide at home whilst I travel, or would ye prefer to accompany me on the voyage?” “We will travel with thee,” answered they, “for we cannot bear to be parted from thee.” So I divided my monies into two parts, one to accompany me and the other to be left in charge of a trusty person, for, as I said to myself, “Haply some accident may happen to the ship and yet we remain alive; in which case we shall find on our return what may stand us in good stead.” I took my two sisters and we went a-voyaging some days and nights; but the master was careless enough to miss his course, and the ship went astray with us and entered a sea other than the sea we sought. For a time we knew naught of this; and the wind blew fair for us ten days, after which the look-out man went aloft to see about him and cried, “Good news!” Then he came down rejoicing and said, “I have seen what seemeth to be a city as ’twere a pigeon.” Hereat we rejoiced and, ere an hour of the day had passed, the buildings showed plain in the offing and we asked the Captain, “What is the name of yonder city?” and he answered, “By Allah I wot not, for I never saw it before and never sailed these seas in my life: but, since our troubles have ended in safety, remains for you only to land there with your merchandise and, if you find selling profitable, sell and make your market of what is there; and if not, we will rest here two days and provision ourselves and fare away.” So we entered the port and the Captain went up town and was absent awhile, after which he returned to us and said, “Arise; go up into the city and marvel at the works of Allah with His creatures and pray to be preserved from His righteous wrath!” So we landed and going up into the city, saw at the gate men hending staves in hand; but when we drew near them, behold, they had been translated<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-306" id="noteref-306" epub:type="noteref">306</a> by the anger of Allah and had become stones. Then we entered the city and found all who therein woned into black stones enstoned: not an inhabited house appeared to the espier, nor was there a blower of fire.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-307" id="noteref-307" epub:type="noteref">307</a> We were awe struck at the sight and threaded the market streets where we found the goods and gold and silver left lying in their places; and we were glad and said, “Doubtless there is some mystery in all this.” Then we dispersed about the thoroughfares and each busied himself with collecting the wealth and money and rich stuffs, taking scanty heed of friend or comrade. As for myself I went up to the castle which was strongly fortified; and, entering the King’s palace by its gate of red gold, found all the vaiselle of gold and silver, and the King himself seated in the midst of his Chamberlains and Nabobs and Emirs and Wazirs; all clad in raiment which confounded man’s art. I drew nearer and saw him sitting on a throne incrusted and inlaid with pearls and gems; and his robes were of gold-cloth adorned with jewels of every kind, each one flashing like a star. Around him stood fifty Mamelukes, white slaves, clothed in silks of divers sorts holding their drawn swords in their hands; but when I drew near to them lo! all were black stones. My understanding was confounded at the sight, but I walked on and entered the great hall of the Harím,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-308" id="noteref-308" epub:type="noteref">308</a> whose walls I found hung with tapestries of gold-striped silk and spread with silken carpets embroidered with golden flowers. Here I saw the Queen lying at full length arrayed in robes purfled with fresh young<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-309" id="noteref-309" epub:type="noteref">309</a> pearls; on her head was a diadem set with many sorts of gems each fit for a ring<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-310" id="noteref-310" epub:type="noteref">310</a> and around her neck hung collars and necklaces. All her raiment and her ornaments were in natural state but she had been turned into a black stone by Allah’s wrath. Presently I espied an open door for which I made straight and found leading to it a flight of seven steps. So I walked up and came upon a place pargetted with marble and spread and hung with gold-worked carpets and tapestry, amiddlemost of which stood a throne of juniper-wood inlaid with pearls and precious stones and set with bosses of emeralds. In the further wall was an alcove whose curtains, bestrung with pearls, were let down and I saw a light issuing therefrom; so I drew near and perceived that the light came from a precious stone as big as an ostrich-egg, set at the upper end of the alcove upon a little chryselephantine couch of ivory and gold; and this jewel, blazing like the sun, cast its rays wide and side. The couch also was spread with all manner of silken stuffs amazing the gazer with their richness and beauty. I marvelled much at all this, especially when seeing in that place candles ready lighted; and I said in my mind, “Needs must some one have lighted these candles.” Then I went forth and came to the kitchen and thence to the buttery and the King’s treasure-chambers; and continued to explore the palace and to pace from place to place; I forgot myself in my awe and marvel at these matters and I was drowned in thought till the night came on. Then I would have gone forth, but knowing not the gate I lost my way, so I returned to the alcove whither the lighted candles directed me and sat down upon the couch; and wrapping myself in a coverlet, after I had repeated somewhat from the Koran, I would have slept but could not, for restlessness possessed me. When night was at its noon I heard a voice chanting the Koran in sweetest accents; but the tone thereof was weak; so I rose, glad to hear the silence broken, and followed the sound until I reached a closet whose door stood ajar. Then peeping through a chink I considered the place and lo! it was an oratory wherein was a prayer-niche<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-311" id="noteref-311" epub:type="noteref">311</a> with two wax candles burning and lamps hanging from the ceiling. In it too was spread a prayer-carpet whereupon sat a youth fair to see; and before him on its stand<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-312" id="noteref-312" epub:type="noteref">312</a> was a copy of the Koran, from which he was reading. I marvelled to see him alone alive amongst the people of the city and entering saluted him; whereupon he raised his eyes and returned my salam. Quoth I, “Now by the Truth of what thou readest in Allah’s Holy Book, I conjure thee to answer my question.” He looked upon me with a smile and said, “O handmaid of Allah, first tell me the cause of thy coming hither, and I in turn will tell what hath befallen both me and the people of this city, and what was the reason of my escaping their doom.” So I told him my story whereat he wondered; and I questioned him of the people of the city, when he replied, “Have patience with me for awhile, O my sister!” and, reverently closing the Holy Book, he laid it up in a satin bag. Then he seated me by his side; and I looked at him and behold, he was as the moon at its full, fair of face and rare of form, soft-sided and slight, of well-proportioned height, and cheek smoothly bright and diffusing light; in brief a sweet, a sugar-stick,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-313" id="noteref-313" epub:type="noteref">313</a> even as saith the poet of the like of him in these couplets:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>That night th’ astrologer a scheme of planets drew, ✿ And lo! a graceful shape of youth appeared in view:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Saturn had stained his locks with Saturninest jet, ✿ And spots of nut-brown musk on rosy side-face blew:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-314" id="noteref-314" epub:type="noteref">314</a></span>
						<br/>
						<span>Mars tinctured either cheek with tinct of martial red; ✿ Sagittal shots from eyelids Sagittarius threw:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dowered him Mercury with bright mercurial wit; ✿ Bore off the Bear<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-315" id="noteref-315" epub:type="noteref">315</a> what all man’s evil glances grew:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Amazed stood Astrophil to sight the marvel-birth ✿ When louted low the Moon at full to buss the Earth.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">And of a truth Allah the Most High had robed him in the raiment of perfect grace and had purfled and fringed it with a cheek all beauty and loveliness, even as the poet saith of such an one:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>By his eyelids shedding perfume and his fine slim waist I swear, ✿ By the shooting of his shafts barbed with sorcery passing rare;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By the softness of his sides,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-316" id="noteref-316" epub:type="noteref">316</a> and glances’ lingering light; ✿ And brow of dazzling day-tide ray and night within his hair;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By his eyebrows which deny to who look upon them rest, ✿ Now bidding now forbidding, ever dealing joy and care;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By the rose that decks his cheek, and the myrtle of its moss;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-317" id="noteref-317" epub:type="noteref">317</a> ✿ By jacinths bedded in his lips and pearl his smile lays bare;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By his graceful bending neck and the curving of his breast; ✿ Whose polished surface beareth those granados, lovely pair;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By his heavy hips that quiver as he passeth in his pride; ✿ Or he resteth with that waist which is slim beyond compare;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By the satin of his skin, by that fine unsullied sprite; ✿ By the beauty that containeth all things bright and debonnair;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>By that ever-open hand; by the candour of his tongue; ✿ By noble blood and high degree whereof he’s hope and heir;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Musk from him borrows muskiness she loveth to exhale; ✿ And all the airs of ambergris through him perfume the air;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The sun, methinks, the broad bright sun, before my love would pale; ✿ And sans his splendour would appear a paring of his nail.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-318" id="noteref-318" epub:type="noteref">318</a></span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">I glanced at him with one glance of eyes which caused me a thousand sighs; and my heart was at once taken captive-wise; so I asked him, “O my lord and my love, tell me that whereof I questioned thee;” and he answered, “Hearing is obeying! Know, O handmaid of Allah, that this city was the capital of my father who is the King thou sawest on the throne transfigured by Allah’s wrath to a black stone, and the Queen thou foundest in the alcove is my mother. They and all the people of the city were Magians who fire adored in lieu of the Omnipotent Lord<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-319" id="noteref-319" epub:type="noteref">319</a> and were wont to swear by lowe and heat and shade and light, and the spheres revolving day and night. My father had ne’er a son till he was blest with me near the last of his days; and he reared me till I grew up and prosperity anticipated me in all things. Now it so fortuned there was with us an old woman well stricken in years, a Moslemah who, inwardly believing in Allah and His Apostle, conformed outwardly with the religion of my people; and my father placed thorough confidence in her for that he knew her to be trustworthy and virtuous; and he treated her with ever-increasing kindness believing her to be of his own belief. So when I was well-nigh grown up my father committed me to her charge saying:⁠—Take him and educate him and teach him the rules of our faith; let him have the best instructions and cease not thy fostering care of him. So she took me and taught me the tenets of Al-Islam with the divine ordinances<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-320" id="noteref-320" epub:type="noteref">320</a> of the Wuzu-ablution and the five daily prayers and she made me learn the Koran by rote, often repeating:⁠—Serve none save Allah Almighty! When I had mastered this much of knowledge she said to me:⁠—O my son, keep this matter concealed from thy sire and reveal naught to him lest he slay thee. So I hid it from him and I abode on this wise for a term of days when the old woman died, and the people of the city redoubled in their impiety<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-321" id="noteref-321" epub:type="noteref">321</a> and arrogance and the error of their ways. One day, while they were as wont, behold, they heard a loud and terrible sound and a crier crying out with a voice like roaring thunder so every ear could hear, far and near:⁠—O folk of this city leave ye your fire-worshipping and adore Allah the All-compassionate King! At this, fear and terror fell upon the citizens and they crowded to my father (he being King of the city) and asked him:⁠—What is this awesome voice we have heard, for it hath confounded us with the excess of its terror?; and he answered:⁠—Let not a voice fright you nor shake your steadfast sprite nor turn you back from the faith which is right. Their hearts inclined to his words and they ceased not to worship the fire and they persisted in rebellion for a full year from the time they heard the first voice; and on the anniversary came a second cry and a third at the head of the third year, each year once. Still they persisted in their malpractices till one day at break of dawn, judgment and the wrath of Heaven descended upon them with all suddenness, and by the visitation of Allah all were metamorphosed into black stones,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-322" id="noteref-322" epub:type="noteref">322</a> they and their beasts and their cattle; and none was saved save myself who at the time was engaged in my devotions. From that day to this I am in the case thou seest, constant in prayer and fasting and reading and reciting the Koran; but I am indeed grown weary by reason of my loneliness, having none to bear me company.” Then said I to him (for in very sooth he had won my heart and was the lord of my life and soul), “O youth, wilt thou fare with me to Baghdad city and visit the Olema and men learned in the law and doctors of divinity and get thee increase of wisdom and understanding and theology? And know that she who standeth in thy presence will be thy handmaid, albeit she be head of her family and mistress over men and eunuchs and servants and slaves. Indeed my life was no life before it fell in with thy youth. I have here a ship laden with merchandise; and in very truth Destiny drove me to this city that I might come to the knowledge of these matters, for it was fated that we should meet. And I ceased not to persuade him and speak him fair and use every art till he consented.”⁠⸺⁠And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.</p>
				<p><span class="night-announcement">Now when it was the Eighteenth Night,</span> She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the lady ceased not persuading with soft speech the youth to depart with her till he consented and said “Yes.” She slept that night lying at his feet and hardly knowing where she was for excess of joy. As soon as the next morning dawned (she pursued, addressing the Caliph), I arose and we entered the treasuries and took thence whatever was light in weight and great in worth; then we went down side by side from the castle to the city, where we were met by the Captain and my sisters and slaves who had been seeking for me. When they saw me they rejoiced and asked what had stayed me, and I told them all I had seen and related to them the story of the young Prince and the transformation wherewith the citizens had been justly visited. Hereat all marvelled, but when my two sisters (these two bitches, O Commander of the Faithful!) saw me by the side of my young lover they jaloused me on his account and were wroth and plotted mischief against me. We awaited a fair wind and went on board rejoicing and ready to fly for joy by reason of the goods we had gotten, but my own greatest joyance was in the youth; and we waited awhile till the wind blew fair for us and then we set sail and fared forth. Now as we sat talking, my sisters asked me, “And what wilt thou do with this handsome young man?”; and I answered, “I purpose to make him my husband!” Then I turned to him and said, “O my lord, I have that to propose to thee wherein thou must not cross me; and this it is that, when we reach Baghdad, my native city, I offer thee my life as thy handmaiden in holy matrimony, and thou shalt be to me baron and I will be femme to thee.” He answered, “I hear and I obey!; thou art my lady and my mistress and whatso thou doest I will not gainsay.” Then I turned to my sisters and said, “This is my gain; I content me with this youth and those who have gotten aught of my property let them keep it as their gain with my good will.” “Thou sayest and doest well,” answered the twain, but they imagined mischief against me. We ceased not spooning before a fair wind till we had exchanged the sea of peril for the seas of safety and, in a few days, we made Bassorah-city, whose buildings loomed clear before us as evening fell. But after we had retired to rest and were sound asleep, my two sisters arose and took me up, bed and all, and threw me into the sea: they did the same with the young Prince who, as he could not swim, sank and was drowned and Allah enrolled him in the noble army of Martyrs.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-323" id="noteref-323" epub:type="noteref">323</a> As for me would Heaven I had been drowned with him, but Allah deemed that I should be of the saved; so when I awoke and found myself in the sea and saw the ship making off like a flash of lightning, He threw in my way a piece of timber which I bestrided, and the waves tossed me to and fro till they cast me upon an island coast, a high land and an uninhabited. I landed and walked about the island the rest of the night and, when morning dawned, I saw a rough track barely fit for child of Adam to tread, leading to what proved a shallow ford connecting island and mainland. As soon as the sun had risen I spread my garments to dry in its rays; and ate of the fruits of the island and drank of its waters; then I set out along the foot-track and ceased not walking till I reached the mainland. Now when there remained between me and the city but a two hours’ journey behold, a great serpent, the bigness of a date-palm, came fleeing towards me in all haste, gliding along now to the right then to the left till she was close upon me, whilst her tongue lolled ground-wards a span long and swept the dust as she went. She was pursued by a Dragon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-324" id="noteref-324" epub:type="noteref">324</a> who was not longer than two lances, and of slender build about the bulk of a spear and, although her terror lent her speed, and she kept wriggling from side to side, he overtook her and seized her by the tail, whereat her tears streamed down and her tongue was thrust out in her agony. I took pity on her and, picking up a stone and calling upon Allah for aid, threw it at the Dragon’s head with such force that he died then and there; and the serpent opening a pair of wings flew into the lift and disappeared from before my eyes. I sat down marvelling over that adventure, but I was weary and, drowsiness overcoming me, I slept where I was for a while. When I awoke I found a jet-black damsel sitting at my feet shampooing them; and by her side stood two black bitches (my sisters, O Commander of the Faithful!). I was ashamed before her<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-325" id="noteref-325" epub:type="noteref">325</a> and, sitting up, asked her, “O my sister, who and what art thou?”; and she answered, “How soon hast thou forgotten me! I am she for whom thou wroughtest a good deed and sowedest the seed of gratitude and slewest her foe; for I am the serpent whom by Allah’s aidance thou didst just now deliver from the Dragon. I am a Jinniyah and he was a Jinn who hated me, and none saved my life from him save thou. As soon as thou freedest me from him I flew on the wind to the ship whence thy sisters threw thee, and removed all that was therein to thy house. Then I ordered my attendant Marids to sink the ship and I transformed thy two sisters into these black bitches; for I know all that hath passed between them and thee; but as for the youth, of a truth he is drowned. So saying she flew up with me and the bitches, and presently set us down on the terrace-roof of my house, wherein I found ready stored the whole of what property was in my ship, nor was aught of it missing. Now (continued the serpent that was), I swear by all engraven on the seal-ring of Solomon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-326" id="noteref-326" epub:type="noteref">326</a> (with whom be peace!) unless thou deal to each of these bitches three hundred stripes every day I will come and imprison thee for ever under the earth.” I answered, “Hearkening and obedience!”; and away she flew. But before going she again charged me saying, “I again swear by Him who made the two seas flow<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-327" id="noteref-327" epub:type="noteref">327</a> (and this be my second oath) if thou gainsay me I will come and transform thee like thy sisters.” Since then I have never failed, O Commander of the Faithful, to beat them with that number of blows till their blood flows with my tears, I pitying them the while, and well they wot that their being scourged is no fault of mine and they accept my excuses. And this is my tale and my history! The Caliph marvelled at her adventures and then signed to Jaʼafar who said to the second lady, the Portress, “And thou, how camest thou by the welts and wheals upon thy body?” So she began the</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-1-4-6" epub:type="subchapter">
				<h4 epub:type="title">Tale of the Portress</h4>
				<p>Know, O Commander of the Faithful, that I had a father who, after fulfilling his time, deceased and left me great store of wealth. I remained single for a short time and presently married one of the richest of his day. I abode with him a year when he also died, and my share of his property amounted to eighty thousand dinars in gold according to the holy law of inheritance.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-328" id="noteref-328" epub:type="noteref">328</a> Thus I became passing rich and my reputation spread far and wide, for I had made me ten changes of raiment, each worth a thousand dinars. One day as I was sitting at home, behold, there came in to me an old woman<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-329" id="noteref-329" epub:type="noteref">329</a> with lantern jaws and cheeks sucked in, and eyes rucked up, and eyebrows scant and scald, and head bare and bald; and teeth broken by time and mauled, and back bending and neck-nape nodding, and face blotched, and rheum running, and hair like a snake black-and-white-speckled, in complexion a very fright, even as saith the poet of the like of her:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Ill-omened hag! unshriven be her sins ✿ Nor mercy visit her on dying bed:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thousand head-strongest he-mules would her guiles, ✿ Despite their bolting, lead with spider thread.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">And as saith another:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>A hag to whom th’ unlawful lawfullest ✿ And witchcraft wisdom in her sight are grown:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>A mischief-making brat, a demon-maid, ✿ A whorish woman and a pimping crone.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-330" id="noteref-330" epub:type="noteref">330</a></span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">When the old woman entered she salamed to me and kissing the ground before me, said, “I have at home an orphan daughter and this night are her wedding and her displaying.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-331" id="noteref-331" epub:type="noteref">331</a> We be poor folks and strangers in this city knowing none inhabitant and we are broken-hearted. So do thou earn for thyself a recompense and a reward in Heaven by being present at her displaying and, when the ladies of this city shall hear that thou art to make act of presence, they also will present themselves; so shalt thou comfort her affliction, for she is sore bruised in spirit and she hath none to look to save Allah the Most High.” Then she wept and kissed my feet reciting these couplets:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<span>Thy presence bringeth us a grace</span>
							<span>✿ We own before thy winsome face:</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>And wert thou absent ne’er an one</span>
							<span>✿ Could stand in stead or take thy place.</span>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">So pity gat hold on me and compassion and I said, “Hearing is consenting and, please Allah, I will do somewhat more for her; nor shall she be shown to her bridegroom save in my raiment and ornaments and jewelry.” At this the old woman rejoiced and bowed her head to my feet and kissed them, saying, “Allah requite thee weal, and comfort thy heart even as thou has comforted mine! But, O my lady, do not trouble thyself to do me this service at this hour; be thou ready by supper-time,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-332" id="noteref-332" epub:type="noteref">332</a> when I will come and fetch thee.” So saying she kissed my hand and went her ways. I set about stringing my pearls and donning my brocades and making my toilette, little recking what Fortune had in womb for me, when suddenly the old woman stood before me, simpering and smiling till she showed every tooth stump, and quoth she, “O my mistress, the city madams have arrived and when I apprized them that thou promisedst to be present, they were glad and they are now awaiting thee and looking eagerly for thy coming and for the honour of meeting thee.” So I threw on my mantilla and, making the old crone walk before me and my handmaidens behind me, I fared till we came to a street well watered and swept neat, where the winnowing breeze blew cool and sweet. Here we were stopped by a gate arched over with a dome of marble stone firmly seated on solidest foundation, and leading to a Palace whose walls from earth rose tall and proud, and whose pinnacle was crowned by the clouds,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-333" id="noteref-333" epub:type="noteref">333</a> and over the doorway were writ these couplets:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>I am the wone where Mirth shall ever smile; ✿ The home of Joyance through my lasting while:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And ’mid my court a fountain jets and flows, ✿ Nor tears nor troubles shall that fount defile:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>The marge with royal Nuʼuman’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-334" id="noteref-334" epub:type="noteref">334</a> bloom is dight, ✿ Myrtle, Narcissus-flower and Chamomile.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">Arrived at the gate, before which hung a black curtain, the old woman knocked and it was opened to us; when we entered and found a vestibule spread with carpets and hung around with lamps all alight and wax candles in candelabra adorned with pendants of precious gems and noble ores. We passed on through this passage till we entered a saloon, whose like for grandeur and beauty is not to be found in this world. It was hung and carpeted with silken stuffs, and was illuminated with branches, sconces and tapers ranged in double row, an avenue abutting on the upper or noble end of the saloon, where stood a couch of juniper-wood encrusted with pearls and gems and surmounted by a baldaquin with mosquito-curtains of satin looped up with margarites. And hardly had we taken note of this when there came forth from the baldaquin a young lady and I looked, O Commander of the Faithful, upon a face and form more perfect than the moon when fullest, with a favour brighter than the dawn gleaming with saffron-hued light, even as the poet sang when he said:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<span>Thou pacest the palace a marvel-sight,</span>
							<span>✿ A bride for a Kisrá’s or Kaisar’s night!</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>Wantons the rose on thy roseate cheek,</span>
							<span>✿ O cheek as the blood of the dragon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-335" id="noteref-335" epub:type="noteref">335</a> bright!</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>Slim-waisted, languorous, sleepy-eyed,</span>
							<span>✿ With charms which promise all love-delight:</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>And the tire which attires thy tiara’d brow</span>
							<span>✿ Is a night of woe on a morn’s glad light.</span>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">The fair young girl came down from the estrade and said to me, “Welcome and well come and good cheer to my sister, the dearly-beloved, the illustrious, and a thousand greetings!” Then she recited these couplets:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>An but the house could know who cometh ’twould rejoice, ✿ And kiss the very dust whereon thy foot was placed;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And with the tongue of circumstance the walls would say, ✿ “Welcome and hail to one with generous gifts engraced!”</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">Then sat she down and said to me, “O my sister, I have a brother who hath had sight of thee at sundry wedding-feasts and festive seasons: he is a youth handsomer than I, and he hath fallen desperately in love with thee, for that bounteous Destiny hath garnered in thee all beauty and perfection; and he hath given silver to this old woman that she might visit thee; and she hath contrived on this wise to foregather us twain. He hath heard that thou art one of the nobles of thy tribe nor is he aught less in his; and, being desirous to ally his lot with thy lot, he hath practised this device to bring me in company with thee; for he is fain to marry thee after the ordinance of Allah and his Apostle; and in what is lawful and right there is no shame.” When I heard these words and saw myself fairly entrapped in the house, I said, “Hearing is consenting.” She was delighted at this and clapped her hands;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-336" id="noteref-336" epub:type="noteref">336</a> whereupon a door opened and out of it came a young man blooming in the prime of life, exquisitely dressed, a model of beauty and loveliness and symmetry and perfect grace, with gentle winning manners and eyebrows like a bended bow and shaft on cord, and eyes which bewitched all hearts with sorcery lawful in the sight of the Lord; even as saith some rhymer describing the like of him:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>His face as the face of the young moon shines ✿ And Fortune stamps him with pearls for signs.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-337" id="noteref-337" epub:type="noteref">337</a></span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">And Allah favour him who said:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Blest be his beauty; blest the Lord’s decree ✿ Who cast and shaped a thing so bright of blee:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>All gifts of beauty he conjoins in one; ✿ Lost in his love is all humanity;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For Beauty’s self inscribed on his brow ✿ “I testify there be no Good but he!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-338" id="noteref-338" epub:type="noteref">338</a></span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">When I looked at him my heart inclined to him and I loved him; and he sat by my side and talked with me a while, when the young lady again clapped her hands and behold, a side-door opened and out of it came the Kazi with his four assessors as witnesses; and they saluted us and, sitting down, drew up and wrote out the marriage-contract between me and the youth and retired. Then he turned to me and said, “Be our night blessed,” presently adding, “O my lady, I have a condition to lay on thee.” Quoth I, “O my lord, what is that?” Whereupon he arose and fetching a copy of the Holy Book presented it to me saying, “Swear hereon thou wilt never look at any other than myself nor incline thy body or thy heart to him.” I swore readily enough to this and he joyed with exceeding joy and embraced me round the neck while love for him possessed my whole heart. Then they set the table<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-339" id="noteref-339" epub:type="noteref">339</a> before us and we ate and drank till we were satisfied; but I was dying for the coming of the night. And when night did come he led me to the bride-chamber and slept with me on the bed and continued to kiss and embrace me till the morning⁠—such a night I had never seen in my dreams. I lived with him a life of happiness and delight for a full month, at the end of which I asked his leave<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-340" id="noteref-340" epub:type="noteref">340</a> to go on foot to the bazar and buy me certain especial stuffs and he gave me permission. So I donned my mantilla and, taking with me the old woman and a slave-girl,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-341" id="noteref-341" epub:type="noteref">341</a> I went to the khan of the silk-mercers, where I seated myself in the shop-front of a young merchant whom the old woman recommended, saying to me, “This youth’s father died when he was a boy and left him great store of wealth: he hath by him a mighty fine<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-342" id="noteref-342" epub:type="noteref">342</a> stock of goods and thou wilt find what thou seekest with him, for none in the bazar hath better stuffs than he.” Then she said to him, “Show this lady the most costly stuffs thou hast by thee;” and he replied, “Hearkening and obedience!” Then she whispered me, “Say a civil word to him!”; but I replied, “I am pledged to address no man save my lord.” And as she began to sound his praise I said sharply to her, “We want nought of thy sweet speeches; our wish is to buy of him whatsoever we need, and return home.” So he brought me all I sought and I offered him his money, but he refused to take it saying, “Let it be a gift offered to my guest this day!” Then quoth I to the old woman, “If he will not take the money, give him back his stuff.” “By Allah,” cried he, “not a thing will I take from thee: I sell it not for gold or for silver, but I give it all as a gift for a single kiss; a kiss more precious to me than everything the shop containeth.” Asked the old woman, “What will the kiss profit thee?”; and, turning to me, whispered, “O my daughter, thou hearest what this young fellow saith? What harm will it do thee if he get a kiss from thee and thou gettest what thou seekest at that price?” Replied I, “I take refuge with Allah from such action! Knowest thou not that I am bound by an oath?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-343" id="noteref-343" epub:type="noteref">343</a> But she answered, “Now whist! just let him kiss thee and neither speak to him nor lean over him, so shalt thou keep thine oath and thy silver, and no harm whatever shall befal thee.” And she ceased not to persuade me and importune me and make light of the matter till evil entered into my mind and I put my head in the poke<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-344" id="noteref-344" epub:type="noteref">344</a> and, declaring I would ne’er consent, consented. So I veiled my eyes and held up the edge of my mantilla between me and the people passing and he put his mouth to my cheek under the veil. But while kissing me he bit me so hard a bite that it tore the flesh from my cheek,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-345" id="noteref-345" epub:type="noteref">345</a> and blood flowed fast and faintness came over me. The old woman caught me in her arms and, when I came to myself, I found the shop shut up and her sorrowing over me and saying “Thank Allah for averting which might have been worse!” Then she said to me, “Come, take heart and let us go home before the matter become public and thou be dishonoured. And when thou art safe inside the house feign sickness and lie down and cover thyself up; and I will bring thee powders and plasters to cure this bite withal, and thy wound will be healed at the latest in three days.” So after a while I arose and I was in extreme distress and terror came full upon me; but I went on little by little till I reached the house when I pleaded illness and lay me down. When it was night my husband came in to me and said, “What hath befallen thee, O my darling, in this excursion of thine?”; and I replied, “I am not well: my head acheth badly.” Then he lighted a candle and drew near me and looked hard at me and asked, “What is that wound I see on thy cheek and in the tenderest part too?” And I answered, “When I went out to-day with thy leave to buy stuffs, a camel laden with firewood jostled me and one of the pieces tore my veil and wounded my cheek as thou seest; for indeed the ways of this city are strait.” “To-morrow,” cried he, “I will go complain to the Governor, so shall he gibbet every fuel-seller in Baghdad.” “Allah upon thee,” said I, “burden not thy soul with such sin against any man. The fact is I was riding on an ass and it stumbled, throwing me to the ground; and my cheek lighted upon a stick or a bit of glass and got this wound.” “Then,” said he, “to-morrow I will go up to Jaʼafar the Barmaki and tell him the story, so shall he kill every donkey-boy in Baghdad.” “Wouldst thou destroy all these men because of my wound,” said I, “when this which befel me was by decree of Allah and His destiny?” But he answered, “There is no help for it;” and, springing to his feet, plied me with words and pressed me till I was perplexed and frightened; and I stuttered and stammered and my speech waxed thick and I said, “This is a mere accident by decree of Allah.” Then, O Commander of the Faithful, he guessed my case and said, “Thou hast been false to thine oath.” He at once cried out with a loud cry, whereupon a door opened and in came seven black slaves whom he commanded to drag me from my bed and throw me down in the middle of the room. Furthermore, he ordered one of them to pinion my elbows and squat upon my head; and a second to sit upon my knees and secure my feet; and drawing his sword he gave it to a third and said, “Strike her, O Saʼad, and cut her in twain and let each one take half and cast it into the Tigris<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-346" id="noteref-346" epub:type="noteref">346</a> that the fish may eat her; for such is the retribution due to those who violate their vows and are unfaithful to their love.” And he redoubled in wrath and recited these couplets:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>An there be one who shares with me her love, ✿ I’d strangle Love tho’ life by Love were slain;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Saying, O Soul, Death were the nobler choice, ✿ For ill is Love when shared ’twixt partners twain.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">Then he repeated to the slave, “Smite her, O Saʼad!” And when the slave who was sitting upon me made sure of the command he bent down to me and said, “O my mistress, repeat the profession of Faith and bethink thee if there be any thing thou wouldst have done; for verily this is the last hour of thy life.” “O good slave,” said I, “wait but a little while and get off my head that I may charge thee with my last injunctions.” Then I raised my head and saw the state I was in, how I had fallen from high degree into lowest disgrace; and into death after life (and such life!) and how I had brought my punishment on myself by my own sin; whereupon the tears streamed from mine eyes and I wept with exceeding weeping. But he looked on me with eyes of wrath, and began repeating:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Tell her who turneth from our love to work it injury sore, ✿ And taketh her a fine new love the old love tossing o’er:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>We cry enough o’ thee ere thou enough of us shalt cry! ✿ What past between us doth suffice and haply something more.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-347" id="noteref-347" epub:type="noteref">347</a></span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">When I heard this, O Commander of the Faithful, I wept and looked at him and began repeating these couplets:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>
							<span>To severance you doom my love and all unmoved remain;</span>
							<span>✿ My tear-sore lids you sleepless make and sleep while I complain:</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>You make firm friendship reign between mine eyes and insomny;</span>
							<span>✿ Yet can my heart forget you not, nor tears can I restrain:</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>You made me swear with many an oath my troth to hold for aye;</span>
							<span>✿ But when you reigned my bosom’s lord you wrought me traitor-bane:</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>I loved you like a silly child who wots not what is Love;</span>
							<span>✿ Then spare the learner, let her not be by the master slain!</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>By Allah’s name I pray you write, when I am dead and gone,</span>
							<span>✿ Upon my tomb, This died of Love whose senses Love had ta’en:</span>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<span>Then haply one shall pass that way who fire of Love hath felt,</span>
							<span>✿ And treading on a lover’s heart with ruth and woe shall melt.</span>
						</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">When I ended my verses tears came again; but the poetry and the weeping only added fury to his fury, and he recited:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>’Twas not satiety bade me leave the dearling of my soul, ✿ But that she sinned a mortal sin which clipt me in its clip:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>She sought to let another share the love between us twain, ✿ But my True Faith of Unity refuseth partnership.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-348" id="noteref-348" epub:type="noteref">348</a></span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">When he ceased reciting I wept again and prayed his pardon and humbled myself before him and spoke him softly, saying to myself, “I will work on him with words; so haply he will refrain from slaying me, even though he take all I have.” So I complained of my sufferings and began to repeat these couplets:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Now, by thy life and wert thou just my life thou hadst not ta’en, ✿ But who can break the severance-law which parteth lovers twain!</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Thou loadest me with heavy weight of longing love, when I ✿ Can hardly bear my chemisette for weakness and for pain:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I marvel not to see my life and soul in ruin Iain ✿ I marvel much to see my frame such severance-pangs sustain.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">When I ended my verse I wept again; and he looked at me and reviled me in abusive language,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-349" id="noteref-349" epub:type="noteref">349</a> repeating these couplets:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Thou wast all taken up with love of other man, not me; ✿ ’Twas thine to show me severance-face, ’twas only mine to see:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>I’ll leave thee for that first thou wast of me to take thy leave ✿ And patient bear that parting blow thou borest so patiently:</span>
						<br/>
						<span>E’en as thou soughtest other love, so other love I’ll seek, ✿ And make the crime of murdering love thine own atrocity.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p class="continued">When he had ended his verses he again cried out to the slave, “Cut her in half and free us from her, for we have no profit of her.” So the slave drew near me, O Commander of the Faithful, and I ceased bandying verses and made sure of death and, despairing of life, committed my affairs to Almighty Allah, when behold, the old woman rushed in and threw herself at my husband’s feet and kissed them and wept and said, “O my son, by the rights of my fosterage and by my long service to thee, I conjure thee pardon this young lady, for indeed she hath done nothing deserving such doom. Thou art a very young man and I fear lest her death be laid at thy door; for it is said:⁠—Whoso slayeth shall be slain. As for this wanton (since thou deemest her such) drive her out from thy doors, from thy love and from thy heart.” And she ceased not to weep and importune him till he relented and said, “I pardon her, but needs must I set on her my mark which shall show upon her all her life.” Then he bade the slaves drag me along the ground and lay me out at full length, after stripping me of all my clothes;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-350" id="noteref-350" epub:type="noteref">350</a> and when the slaves had so sat upon me that I could not move, he fetched in a rod of quince-tree and came down with it upon my body, and continued beating me on the back and sides till I lost consciousness from excess of pain, and I despaired of life. Then he commanded the slaves to take me away as soon as it was dark, together with the old woman to show them the way and throw me upon the floor of the house wherein I dwelt before my marriage. They did their lord’s bidding and cast me down in my old home and went their ways. I did not revive from my swoon till dawn appeared, when I applied myself to the dressing of my wounds with ointments and other medicaments; and I medicined myself, but my sides and ribs still showed signs of the rod as thou hast seen. I lay in weakly case and confined to my bed for four months before I was able to rise and health returned to me. At the end of that time I went to the house where all this had happened and found it a ruin; the street had been pulled down endlong and rubbish-heaps rose where the building erst was; nor could I learn how this had come about. Then I betook myself to this my sister on my father’s side and found with her these two black bitches. I saluted her and told her what had betided me and the whole of my story and she said, “O my sister, who is safe from the despite of Time and secure? Thanks be to Allah who hath brought thee off safely;” and she began to say:⁠—</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>Such is the World, so bear a patient heart ✿ When riches leave thee and when friends depart!</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Then she told me her own story, and what had happened to her with her two sisters and how matters had ended; so we abode together and the subject of marriage was never on our tongues for all these years. After a while we were joined by our other sister, the procuratrix, who goeth out every morning and buyeth all we require for the day and night; and we continued in such condition till this last night. In the morning our sister went out, as usual, to make her market and then befel us what befel from bringing the Porter into the house and admitting these three Kalandar-men.</p>
				<p>We entreated them kindly and honourably and a quarter of the night had not passed ere three grave and respectable merchants from Mosul joined us and told us their adventures. We sat talking with them but on one condition which they violated, whereupon we treated them as sorted with their breach of promise, and made them repeat the account they had given of themselves. They did our bidding and we forgave their offence; so they departed from us and this morning we were unexpectedly summoned to thy presence. And such is our story! The Caliph wondered at her words and bade the tale be recorded and chronicled and laid up in his muniment-chambers.⁠—And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.</p>
				<p><span class="night-announcement">Now when it was the Nineteenth Night,</span> She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph commanded this story and those of the sister and the Kalandars to be recorded in the archives and be set in the royal muniment-chambers. Then he asked the eldest lady, the mistress of the house, “Knowest thou the whereabouts of the Ifritah who spelled thy sisters?”; and she answered, “O Commander of the Faithful, she gave me a ringlet of her hair saying:⁠—Whenas thou wouldest see me, burn a couple of these hairs and I will be with thee forthright, even though I were beyond Caucasus-mountain.” Quoth the Caliph, “Bring me hither the hair.” So she brought it and he threw the whole lock upon the fire. As soon as the odour of the burning hair dispread itself, the palace shook and trembled, and all present heard a rumbling and rolling of thunder and a noise as of wings and lo! the Jinniyah who had been a serpent stood in the Caliph’s presence. Now she was a Moslemah, so she saluted him and said, “Peace be with thee O Vicar<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-351" id="noteref-351" epub:type="noteref">351</a> of Allah;” whereto he replied, “And with thee also be peace and the mercy of Allah and His blessing.” Then she continued, “Know that this damsel sowed for me the seed of kindness, wherefor I cannot enough requite her, in that she delivered me from death and destroyed mine enemy. Now I had seen how her sisters dealt with her and felt myself bound to avenge her on them. At first I was minded to slay them, but I feared it would be grievous to her, so I transformed them to bitches; but if thou desire their release, O Commander of the Faithful, I will release them to pleasure thee and her for I am of the Moslems.” Quoth the Caliph, “Release them and after we will look into the affair of the beaten lady and consider her case carefully; and if the truth of her story be evidenced I will exact retaliation<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-352" id="noteref-352" epub:type="noteref">352</a> from him who wronged her.” Said the Ifritah, “O Commander of the Faithful, I will forthwith release them and will discover to thee the man who did that deed by this lady and wronged her and took her property, and he is the nearest of all men to thee!” So saying she took a cup of water and muttered a spell over it and uttered words there was no understanding; then she sprinkled some of the water over the faces of the two bitches, saying, “Return to your former human shape!” whereupon they were restored to their natural forms and fell to praising their Creator. Then said the Ifritah, “O Commander of the Faithful, of a truth he who scourged this lady with rods is thy son Al-Amin brother of Al-Maamun;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-353" id="noteref-353" epub:type="noteref">353</a> for he had heard of her beauty and loveliness and he played a lover’s stratagem with her and married her according to the law and committed the crime (such as it is) of scourging her. Yet indeed he is not to be blamed for beating her, for he laid a condition on her and swore her by a solemn oath not to do a certain thing; however, she was false to her vow and he was minded to put her to death, but he feared Almighty Allah and contented himself with scourging her, as thou hast seen, and with sending her back to her own place. Such is the story of the second lady and the Lord knoweth all.” When the Caliph heard these words of the Ifritah, and knew who had beaten the damsel, he marvelled with mighty marvel and said, “Praise be to Allah, the Most High, the Almighty, who hath shown His exceeding mercy towards me, enabling me to deliver these two damsels from sorcery and torture, and vouchsafing to let me know the secret of this lady’s history! And now by Allah, we will do a deed which shall be recorded of us after we are no more.” Then he summoned his son Al-Amin and questioned him of the story of the second lady, the portress; and he told it in the face of truth; whereupon the Caliph bade call into presence the Kazis and their witnesses and the three Kalandars and the first lady with her sisters german who had been ensorcelled; and he married the three to the three Kalandars whom he knew to be princes and sons of Kings and he appointed them chamberlains about his person, assigning to them stipends and allowances and all that they required, and lodging them in his palace at Baghdad. He returned the beaten lady to his son, Al-Amin, renewing the marriage-contract between them and gave her great wealth and bade rebuild the house fairer than it was before. As for himself he took to wife the procuratrix and lay with her that night: and next day he set apart for her an apartment in his Serraglio, with handmaidens for her service and a fixed daily allowance. And the people marvelled at their Caliph’s generosity and natural beneficence and princely wisdom; nor did he forget to send all these histories to be recorded in his annals. When Shahrazad ceased speaking Dunyazad exclaimed, “O my own sister, by Allah in very sooth this is a right pleasant tale and a delectable; never was heard the like of it, but prithee tell me now another story to while away what yet remaineth of the waking hours of this our night.” She replied, “With love and gladness if the King give me leave;” and he said, “Tell thy tale and tell it quickly.” So she began, in these words,</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
