<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="volume-16" id="chapter-16-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Opinions of the Press</h2>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Morning Advertiser</cite>, <em>September 15th, 1885</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">As the holiday season draws to a close the publishers’ announcements of “new books” fill column after column of the organs chosen from these special <i><span xml:lang="fr">communiqués</span></i>. But there is one work which is not entered in these lists, though for years scholars, and many people who are not scholars, have been looking for it with an eagerness which has left far behind the ordinary curiosity which is bestowed on the greatest of contributions to current literature. And to-day the chosen few who are in possession of the volume in question are examining it with an interest proportionate to the long toil which has been bestowed on its preparation. We refer to Captain Burton’s translation of <cite>The Arabian Nights Entertainments</cite>, now entitled <cite>The Book of The Thousand Nights and a Night</cite>, of which the first tome has just been issued. * * * * Captain Burton scorns any namby-pambyism. In the Arabic a spade is usually called a spade, and in the latest English translation it is never designated an agricultural implement. Moreover the endless foot-notes which the editor appends speak with much freedom of many things usually avoided as themes for conversation in polite society, though they throw a flood of light on hundreds of features of Oriental life on which, since travellers have been compelled to write for “refined” audiences, the student has failed to be informed. * * * * * * Yet, admitting that <cite>The Nights</cite> are often coarse and indelicate, and sometimes even gross, it is a mistake to suppose that they are demoralising in the same way that a French novel of the Zola type is, or might be. Indeed, what we would call its impropriety is only a reflection of the <i><span xml:lang="fr">naïve</span></i> freedom with which talk is to this day carried on in the family circles of the East. They see no harm in what we should regard as indecency. So that when Captain Burton prefaces his unbowdlerised version with the Arab proverb, “To the pure in heart all things are pure,” he presents perhaps the best defence he could against the attack which it is quite possible may be made on him for devoting many years of his life to what he terms a “a labour of love.” * * * Captain Burton, thirty-three years ago, went in the disguise of an Indian pilgrim to Mecca and Al-Medinah, and no one capable of giving the world the result of his experience has so minute, so exhaustive a knowledge of Arab and Oriental life generally. Hence the work now begun—only a limited number of students can ever see—is simply priceless to any one who concerns himself with such subjects, and may be regarded as marking an era in the annals of Oriental translation.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">St. James’ Gazette</cite>, <em>September 12th, 1885</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">One of the most important translations to which a great English scholar has ever devoted himself is now in the press. For three decades Captain Burton has been more or less engaged on his translation of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>, the latest of the many versions of that extraordinary story which has been made into English, the only one at all worthy of a great original.</p>
			<div>
				<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Whitehall Review</cite>, <em>September 17th, 1885</em>.</h3>
			</div>
			<p class="c027">The publication of the first volume of Captain Burton’s translation of the <cite>Alif Laïla</cite>, enriches the world of Oriental investigation with a monument of labour and scholarship and of research. The book is advisedly, and even inevitably, printed for private circulation, and is intended, as Captain Burton says in his preface, only for the eyes of such persons as are seriously students of Oriental life and manners, and are desirous of making a more complete acquaintance with the great masterpieces of Eastern literature than has hitherto been possible, except to finished Arabic scholars. * * * * * In the name of the whole world of Oriental scholarship, we offer our heartfelt thanks and congratulations to Captain Burton upon the appearance of this first volume: and we look forward with the keenest interest for its successors.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Home News</cite>, <em>September 18th, 1885</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">Captain Burton has begun to issue the volumes of his subscription translation of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>, and its fortunate possessors will now be able to realize the full flavour of Oriental feeling. They will now have the great storehouse of Eastern folk-lore opened to them, and Captain Burton’s minute acquaintance with Eastern life makes his comments invaluable. In this respect, as well as in the freeness of the translation, the version will be distinguished from its many predecessors. Captain Burton’s preface, it may be observed, bears traces of soreness at official neglect. Indeed it seems curious that his services could not have been utilised in the Soudan, when the want of competent Arabic scholars was so severely felt.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Figaro</cite>, <em>September 19th, 1885</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">A laboured attempt is made in the <cite>Pall Mall Gazette</cite> to show that the publication of the first volume of Captain Burton’s edition of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> is a greater outrage on decency than that of the revelations of Mr. Stead and his associates. The comparison is monstrous and absurd. Captain Burton’s great work is only intended for men and for students who desire to acquire a masterly knowledge of Egyptian Arabic; subscribers only can obtain copies, and but a thousand have been printed.</p>
			<hr class="c035"/>
			<p>I am glad to be able to testify to the ability with which Captain Burton has discharged the first portion of his Herculean task. The second volume will be looked forward to with much interest, though I hope attention will be paid to the translator’s appeal. Captain Burton says that nothing could be more repugnant to his feelings than the idea of these pages being placed in any other hands than the class for whose especial use the book has been prepared.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Nottingham Journal</cite>, <em>September 19th, 1885</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">But to scholars and men who have sufficient love of the soul of these sweet stories to discern the form in its true proportions, the new edition will be welcome. From an Oriental point of view the work is masterly to a degree. The quatrains and couplets, reading like verses from Elizabethan mantels, and forming a perfect rosary of Eastern lore, the constant succession of brilliant pictures, and the pleasure of meeting again our dear old friend Shahrázád, all these combine to give a unique charm and interest to this “perfect expositor of the mediæval Moslem mind.”</p>
			<div>
				<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Daily Exchange</cite>, <em>September 19th, 1885</em>.</h3>
			</div>
			<p class="c027">The first volume of Captain Burton’s <em>Thousand Nights and a Night</em>, printed at Benares by the Kamashastra Society for subscribers only, has been delivered to the latter. If the other nine portions equal the first, English literature will be the richer by a work the like of which is rare. The English is strong and vitally idiomatic. It is the English of Shakespeare and Jeremy Taylor, the English of Robert Browning, with a curiously varied admixture of modern colloquial phraseology. I confess that I was not prepared, familiar as I was with Captain Burton’s other work, to find so perfect a command of clear and vigorous style on the part of the great traveller and Oriental scholar. Mrs. Grundy would have protested against the public issue of <em>The Book of a Thousand Nights and a Night</em>, and Mrs. Grundy would have had reason as well as propriety on her side; but I must say that the tone of the work is singularly robust and healthy. What a treasure-house Captain Burton has opened! Until he turned the key we knew little or nothing of <cite>The Nights</cite>, the Villon Society’s issue notwithstanding, and the notes which he has added to the work have a value which is simply unique.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Continental Times</cite>, <em>September 26th, 1885</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">I have been favoured, if that is the right word to use, with a sight of Captain Burton’s new translation of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>. It is a sumptuous work, in an exquisite binding of gold and black, with broad pages and fine large type, such an edition as a scholar and a book lover finds after his own heart. Moreover, the translation is a wonderful bit of English. Captain Burton has by a fanciful, but on the whole, true impulse, chosen to tell the story in old English, not the English of Chaucer, but of a sufficiently archaic type. The choice of an idiom which in some degree recalls the air of the Canterbury Tales and the Decameron—to say nothing of Pantagruel and Panurge—softens the grossness of some of the stories, and gives an additionally quaint charm to the others. No one, however, will recognise at first sight the book of his childhood. The solemn invocation of Allah on the first page, the spelling of Vizier as Wazir, and of genie as Jinni, as well as the terrible frankness of some of the tales, all seem to transport us into another land than that through which we floated on the “silken sale of infancy.” On the whole, Captain Burton is right in strictly confining his work to the library and the student. The reading of it by the public generally can only spoil an immortal work for our boys and girls.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Montreal Daily Herald</cite>, <em>September 21st, 1885</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">Captain Burton has translated the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>, but will only publish it for private distribution. A correspondent says that “all these years we have been reading Lane’s turgid emasculated selections we have been kept in the dark as to their singular beauty and vitally human strength. I have been amazed at the <cite>Nights</cite> as englished by Captain Burton in strong, vital, picturesque prose. The stories, instead of being pieces of wild extravagance, unreal and theatrically tinselly, with the limelight instead of daylight, and paste instead of diamonds, are full of abounding life.”</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">The Bat</cite>, <em>September 29th, 1885</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">Captain Burton, in his way, renders a gigantic service to all students of literature who are not profound Orientalists, and to many who are, by giving them a literal, honest, and accurate translation of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>. * * * Some idiotic persons here and there, and certain journals which have earned an infamous notoriety by doing their best to deprave public morals, have raised a foolish clamour against Captain Burton and his translation. Journalists, who had no objection to pandering to the worst tastes of humanity at a penny a copy, are suddenly inspired by much righteous indignation at a privately printed work which costs a guinea a volume, and in which the manners, the customs, and the language of the East are boldly represented as they were and as they are. Such critics Captain Burton, and the readers of Captain Burton’s translation, can afford to despise and to ignore. <cite>The Arabian Nights Entertainment</cite> has been the playbook of generations, the delight of the nursery and the school-room for nearly two hundred years. Now it is high time that scholars and students should be allowed to know what the Arabian Nights Entertainment really is. Lovers of Arabic have long since known something of the truth concerning the Alif Laila. It need no Burton, it needed no Payne, to tell the masters of Oriental languages that <em>The Thousand Nights and a Night</em> was a very different thing from what either Galland or Lane had made it out to be. Mr. Payne, in his way, rendered no slight service, Captain Burton, in his way, renders a gigantic service to all students of literature who are not profound Orientalists, and to many who are, by giving them a literal, honest, and accurate translation of the ‘<cite>Arabian Nights</cite>.’ * * * The blatant buffoons who have spoken of Captain Burton’s work indifferently only show their own ignorance of the literature of the East. Captain Burton’s work is well worth the price he charges for it to students of Eastern literatures and Eastern manners, and Eastern customs; but the misguided lunatic who invests in it in the hope of getting hold of a good thing, in the Holywell Street sense of the term, will find indeed that the fool and his money are soon parted.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">The Academy</cite>, <em>October 3rd, 1885</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">As Capt. Richard F. Burton’s translation of <cite>The Thousand and One Nights</cite> is likely for several reasons to awaken a literary controversy, the following letter from Mr. John Addington Symonds in the <cite>Academy</cite> of October 3, will be read with interest. The subject upon which it touches is an important one, and one which must be regarded from a scholarly as well as a moral point of view. Mr. Symonds writes like the scholar that he is; we shall soon see how the moralists write, and if they say anything to the point we shall copy it:—</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite"><span xml:lang="de">Am Hof, Davos Platz</span></cite>, Switzerland, <em>September 27th, 1885</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c016">“There is an outcry in some quarters against Capt. Burton’s translation of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>. Only one volume of the work has reached me, and I have not as yet read the whole of it. Of the translator’s notes I will not speak, the present sample being clearly insufficient to judge by; but I wish to record a protest against the hypocrisy which condemns his text. When we invite our youth to read an unexpurgated Bible (in Hebrew and Greek, or in the authorised version), an unexpurgated Aristophanes, an unexpurgated Juvenal, an unexpurgated Boccaccio, an unexpurgated Rabelais, an unexpurgated collection of Elizabethan dramatists, including Shakespeare, and an unexpurgated Plato (in Greek or in Prof. Jowett’s English version), it is surely inconsistent to exclude the unexpurgated <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> whether in the original or in any English version, from the studies of a nation who rule India and administer Egypt.</p>
			<p class="c012">“The qualities of Capt. Burton’s translation are similar to those of his previous literary works, and the defects of those qualities are also similar. Commanding a vast and miscellaneous vocabulary, he takes such pleasure in the use of it that sometimes he transgresses the unwritten laws of artistic harmony. From the point of view of language, I hold that he is too eager to seize the <i><span xml:lang="fr">mot propre</span></i> of his author, and to render that by any equivalent which comes to hand from field or fallow, waste or warren, hill or hedgerow, in our vernacular. Therefore, as I think, we find some coarse passages of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> rendered with unnecessary crudity, and some poetic passages marred by archaisms and provincialisms. But I am at a loss to perceive how Burton’s method of translation should be less applicable to the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> than to the <cite>Lusiad</cite>. So far as, I can judge, it is better suited to the <i><span xml:lang="fr">naïveté</span></i> combined with stylistic subtlety of the former than to the smooth humanistic elegancies of the latter.</p>
			<p class="c012">“This, however, is a minor point. The real question is whether a word for word version of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>, executed with peculiar literary vigor, exact scholarship, and rare insight into Oriental modes of thought and feeling, can under any shadow of pretence be classed with ‘the garbage of the brothels.’ In the lack of lucidity, which is supposed to distinguish English folk, our middle-class <i><span xml:lang="la">censores morum</span></i> strain at the gnat of a privately circulated translation of an Arabic classic, while they daily swallow the camel of higher education based upon minute study of Greek and Latin literature. When English versions of Theocritus and Ovid, of Plato’s <cite>Phaedrus</cite> and the <cite>Ecclesiazusae</cite>, now within the reach of every school-boy, have been suppressed, then and not till then can a “plain and literal” rendering of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> be denied with any colour of consistency to adult readers. I am far from saying that there are not valid reasons for thus dealing with Hellenic and Graeco-Roman and Oriental literature in its totality. But let folk reckon what Anglo-Saxon Puritanism logically involves. If they desire an Anglo-Saxon Index Librorum Prohibitorum, let them equitably and consistently apply their principles of inquisitorial scrutiny to every branch of human culture.</p>
			<div class="c002 lg-container-r">
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">“JOHN ADDINGTON SYMONDS.”</div>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">The Lincoln Gazette</cite>, <em>Saturday, October 10, 1885</em>.</h3>
			<div class="nf-center-c1">
				<div class="c003 nf-center">
					<div>
						<cite>THOUSAND NIGHTS AND A NIGHT.</cite>
					</div>
					<div>
						<span class="sc">First Notice.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>Everything comes to him who waits—even the long-promised, eagerly-expected “Plain and Literal Translation of the Arabian Nights,” by Richard F. Burton. It is a whole quarter of a century since this translation of one of the most famous books of the world was contemplated, and we are told it is the natural outcome of the well-known Pilgrimage to Medinah and Mecca. Of Captain Burton’s fitness for the task who can doubt. It was during that celebrated journey to the tomb of the Prophet that he proved himself to be an Arab—indeed, he says, in a previous state of existence he was a Bedouin. Did he not for months at a stretch lead the life of a Son of the Faithful, eat, drink, sleep, dress, speak, pray like his brother devotees, the sharpest eyes failing to pierce his disguise? He knows the ways of Eastern men—and women—as he does the society of London or Trieste. How completely at home he is with his adopted brethren he showed at Cairo, when, to the amazement of some English friends who were looking on at the noisy devotions of some “howling” Dervishes, he suddenly joined the shouting, gesticulating circle, and behaved as if to the manner born. He has qualified as a “Howler,” he holds a diploma as a master Dervish (see vol. iii. of his “Pilgrimage”), and he can initiate disciples. Clearly, to use a phrase of Arabian story, it was decreed by Allah from the beginning, and fate and fortune have arranged, that Captain Burton should be the one of all others to confer upon his countrymen the boon of the genuine unsophisticated <em>Thousand Nights and a Night</em>. In the whole of our literature no book is more widely known. It is spread broadcast like the Bible, Bunyan and Shakespeare; yet although it is in every house, and every soul in the kingdom knows something about it, yet nobody knows it as it really exists. We have only had what translators have chosen to give—selected, diluted and abridged transcripts. And of late some so-called “original” books have been published containing minor tales purloined bodily from the <cite>Nights</cite>. There have been many versions, beginning with the beautiful Augustan French example of Professor Galland, but all have failed, or rather no one has attempted, to reproduce the great Oriental masterpiece. Judged by the number of editions—a most fallacious test of merit—Lane’s three volumes, on the whole, have found greatest favour with the British public. He was too timid to give to the world the full benefit of his studies, and he kept a drawing-room audience in view. He was careful to adapt his picture to the English standard of propriety, and his suppressions and omissions are on a wholesale scale. Lord Byron said of English novelists that they give a full length of courtship and but a bust of marriage. Mr. Lane thought it expedient draw a tight veil, to tell only half the truth—in short he stops at the bust. Moreover he destroyed all the <i><span xml:lang="fr">mécanique</span></i> of his original, and cruelly altered the form. He did away with the charming and dramatic framework of the tales, turned the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> into the Arabian Chapters, and too often into the Arabian Notes. The first sole and complete translation was furnished recently by Mr. John Payne, whose “Book of the Thousand Nights and One Night” is dedicated to Captain Burton. Mr. Payne printed 500 copies for private circulation, a mere drop in the ocean. His edition was instantly absorbed, clutched with avidity, and is unprocurable—unless, as has happened several times, a stray copy finds its way into the market, and is snatched up at a fancy price. It so happened that Mr. Payne and Captain Burton applied themselves to the same task quite unconscious of each other’s labour. They were running on the same rails like Adams and Leverrier, the joint discoverers of Neptune, or like Darwin and Wallace, who simultaneously evolved the theory of Natural Selection. Hearing of a competitor, Captain Burton, who was travelling to the Gold Coast, he freely offered his fellow worker precedence. Mr. Payne’s production served to whet curiosity, and the young scholars of the day applied themselves to Arabic in order to equip their minds, and to be in a more blissful state of preparation for the triumphant edition to follow. Captain Burton’s first volume in sombre black and dazzling gold—the livery of the Abbasides—made its appearance three weeks ago, and divided attention with the newly-discovered Star. It is the first volume of ten, the set issued solely to subscribers. And already, as in the case of Mr. Payne’s edition, there has been a scramble to secure it, and it is no longer to be had for love or money. The fact is, it fills a void, the world has been waiting for this <i><span xml:lang="fr">chef d’œuvre</span></i>, and all lovers of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> wonder how they have got on without it. We must break off from remarks to give some idea of the originality of the style, of the incomparable way in which the very essence and life of the East is breathed into simple straightforward Anglo-Saxon English. In certain of Captain Burton’s books he borrows words from all languages, there are not enough for his use, and he is driven to coin them. But in the character of Arabian story-teller he is simplicity itself, and whilst avoiding words of length, he introduces just enough of antique phrase as gives a bygone and poetic flavour. The most exacting and the most fastidious will be satisfied at the felicitous handling of immortal themes. A delightful characteristic is the division of the text into Nights. Lane and Payne, for peculiar reasons of their own, have both omitted to mark the breaks in the recital. But now for the first time the thread on which all is strung is clearly kept in view, and justice is done to the long drawn out episode of the young wife who saves her own neck and averts a wholesale massacre of maidens by her round of stories within stories. This is how Shahrazad begins her discourses:—</p>
			<p>“But when it was midnight Shahrazad awoke and signalled to her sister Dunyazad, who sat up and said, ’Allah upon thee, O my sister, recite to us some new story, delightsome and delectable, wherewith to while away the waking hours of our latter night.’ ‘With joy and goodly gree,’ answered Shahrazad, ‘if this pious and auspicious King permit me.’ ‘Tell on,’ quoth the King, who chanced to be sleepless and restless, and therefore was pleased with the prospect of hearing her story. So Shahrazad rejoiced; and thus on the first night of the Thousand Nights and a Night, she began with the</p>
			<h4 class="c030">TALE OF THE TRADER AND THE JINNI.”</h4>
			<p class="c027">“It is related, O auspicious King, that there was a merchant of the merchants who had much wealth and business in various cities. Now on a day he mounted horse and went forth to recover monies in certain towns, and the heat sore oppressed him; so he sat beneath a tree, and putting his hand into his saddle-bags, took thence some broken bread and dry dates and began to break his fast.”</p>
			<p>The recital proceeds until</p>
			<p>“Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day, and ceased to say her permitted say. Then quoth her sister to her, ‘How fair is thy tale, and how grateful, and how sweet and how tasteful!’ And Shahrazad answered her, ‘What is this to that I could tell thee on the coming night were I to live and the King would spare me?’ Then said the King in himself, ’By Allah, I will not slay her until I have heard the rest of her tale.’ Then the King went forth to his audience-hall, and the Wazir went with his daughter’s shroud under his arm. The King issued his orders, and promoted this and deposed that, until the end of the day; and he told the Wazir no whit of what had happened. But the Minister wondered thereat with exceeding wonder; and when the Court broke up King Shahryar entered his palace.</p>
			<div class="ph3">
				<div class="nf-center-c1">
					<div class="c005 nf-center">
						<div>Now when it was the Second Night,</div>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>said Dunyazad to her sister Shahrazad, ‘O my sister, finish for us that story of the Merchant and the Jinni;’ and she answered, ‘With joy and goodly gree, if the King permit me.’”</p>
			<p>The first volume takes us through the mazes of the stories included in the Tales of “The Trader and the Jinni,” “The Fisherman and the Jinni,” “The Porter and the Three Ladies of Baghdad,” “The Tale of the Three Apples,” “The Tale of Nur Al-Din Ali and his Son Badr Al-Din Hassan,” and “The Hunchback’s Tale.” The reader most familiar with the ordinary versions at once is in a new atmosphere. The novelty is startling as it is delightful. We are face to face with the veritable East, where Cairo, Damascus, and Baghdad are known to us as London or Lincoln. The whole life of the people is represented, nothing is passed over or omitted. The picture is complete, and contains everything as the “white contains the black of the eye,” a phrase which, by-the-bye, in Arabic is all contained in one word. We have before alluded to the strength and beauty of the style. The felicities of expression are innumerable. What could be better than the terms to express grief and joy, “his breast broadened,” “his breast straitened,” or the words used of a person in abject terror, “I died in my skin,” or the cruelty of the scourger who persevered “till her forearm failed,” or the expression of despair “The light before his face became night,” or the grand account of the desert storm “when behold a dust cloud up-flew and grew until <em>it walled the horizon from view</em>.” Another speciality of Captain Burton’s edition is the Notes. He is celebrated for sowing the bottom of his pages with curiously illuminating remarks, and he has here carried out his custom in a way to astonish. He tells us that those who peruse his notes in addition to those of Lane would be complete proficients in the knowledge of Oriental practices and customs. Lane begins with Islam from Creation to the present day, and has deservedly won for his Notes the honour of a separate reprint. Captain Burton’s object in his annotations is to treat of subjects which are completely concealed from the multitude. They are utterly and entirely esoteric, and deal with matters of which books usually are kept clear. Indeed he has been assured by an Indian officer who had been 40 years in the East, that he was entirely ignorant of the matters revealed in these Notes. Without these marvellous elucidations the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> would remain only half understood, but by their aid we may know as much of the Moslems as the Moslems know of themselves.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Lincoln Gazette</cite>, <em>October 17</em>.—No. 2.<br/>
			<span class="sc">Second Notice.</span></h3>
			<p class="c027">In bringing out his <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> Captain Burton has made a bold attempt to dispense with the middleman the publisher. He has gone straight to the printer, he himself undertaking the business of distribution. It is time somebody should be energetic. With curious submission authors go on bearing their grievances, and sow that others may reap. Whole editions of travels are issued, and the person most concerned, the author, gets a pittance of £5. And only the other day Walt Whitman, most illustrious of American poets, and in the opinion of capable judges the most illustrious man of letters across the Atlantic, publicly announced that the profits on his writings for a whole year amounted to a few dollars. Captain Burton has broken through the bondage, and the result promises to be highly satisfactory. But he has been threatened with pains and penalties; one trade journal, the <cite>Printing Times and Lithographer</cite>, under the immediate direction of an eminent bookseller, known for his vast purchases of rare publications, announced that <cite>The Arabian Nights</cite> would be suppressed unless its tone and morals were unexceptionable! In short, publishers are exasperated, and, like the Peers, they do not see the force of being abolished. The authors, however, who sigh to be independent, must not take it for granted that the experiment is easy, or likely to be often successful. In this particular instance it is a case of <em>the</em> Man and <em>the</em> Book. There is only one <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> in the world, and only one Captain Burton. The general tone of the London press has been distinctly favourable, the <cite>Standard</cite> leading the way and other journals following suit. The <cite>Pall Mall</cite> made an effort to lodge the author in Bow Street, with its “Chief Director,” but it has likewise had the fairness to give both sides of the question, and whilst attacking on its own account, to admit letters and articles in defence of a genuine and unsophisticated translation. As we have said [in our notice of last week] Captain Burton has been explicit on the point that his edition is by no means intended for the circulating library. It is mainly for scholars, for students whose tastes lead them Eastwards, and last, but not least, it is intended as a guide for our rulers and statesmen. England, we are reminded, “the greatest Mohammedan empire in the world,” neglects Arabism, and discourages it in examinations for the Indian Civil Service, “hence, when suddenly compelled to assume the reins of Government in Moslem lands, as Afghanistan in times past, and Egypt at present, she fails after a fashion which scandalises her few friends; and her crass ignorance concerning the Oriental peoples which should most interest her exposes her to the contempt of Europe as well as of the Eastern world. The deadly blunders we commit through ignorance are brought out in the one fact, that with the English army in Suakim, during the troubles of 1883–84, not an English official in camp, after the death of the gallant and lamented Major Morice, was capable of speaking Arabic.” <cite>The Thousand Nights and a Night</cite> offers a complete picture of Eastern peoples. But the English reader must be prepared to find that the manners of Arabs and Moslems differ from his own. Eastern people look at things from a more natural and primitive point of view, and they say what they think with all the unrestraint of children. At times their plain speaking is formidable, but they are not conscious of impropriety, and their coarseness is not intentional. It is their nature to be downright, and to be communicative on subjects about which the Saxon is shy or silent, and it must be remembered that the separation of the sexes adds considerably to this freedom of expression. Their language is material in quality, every root is objective; as an instance, for the word <i><span xml:lang="fr">soul</span></i> they have no more spiritual equivalent than <em>breath</em>. Even the conversation between parents and children is of incredible frankness, and the Wazir of Egypt talks to his daughter, “the Lady of Beauty,” in a fashion astonishing to the West. But the Arabs are a great mixture. They are keenly alive to beauty, and every youth and every damsel is described in glowing, rapturous terms. We have heard in our own country, so far north as chilly Scotland, of a whole audience standing up in a theatre to applaud the entrance and acknowledge the charms of a beautiful woman. In the East they are far more readily subjugated, and the event is of every-day occurrence, and not a wonder. “When the people of Damascus saw Ajib’s beauty and brilliancy and perfect grace and symmetry (for he was a marvel of comeliness and winning loveliness, softer than the cool breeze of the North, sweeter than limpid waters to man in drouth, and pleasanter than the health for which sick man sueth) a mighty many followed him, whilst others ran on before and sat down on the road until he should come up, that they might gaze on him.” The Arabs are highly imaginative, and their world is peopled with supernatural beings, whilst Ovid is surpassed in the number and ingenuity of their metamorphoses. Their nerves are highly strung, they are emotional to the hysteric degree, and they do everything in the superlative fashion. They love at first sight, and one glimpse of a face is enough to set them in flames; they cease to sleep or to eat until they are admitted to the adored presence, they weep till they faint, they rend their garments, pluck their beards, buffet their faces, and after paroxysms of passion they recover sufficiently to recite verses—“and he beat his face and head and recited these couplets”—“then she recited, weeping bitterly the while”—“When the young man heard these words he wept with sore weeping, till his bosom was drenched with tears, and began reciting.” All this effervescence, so different to our rigid repression, all this exuberance of feeling is the gift of a hot climate. And, besides this easy stirring of their passions, they always live in supreme consciousness that every impulse, every act is decreed, that they drift without will of their own, and are the helpless creatures of destiny. Half their talk consists of invocations to Allah, the All-ruling, All-gracious Allah! This fatalistic element is a leading feature in the <cite>Nights</cite>. All that happens is accepted with submission, and with the conviction that nothing can be averted. The Wazir’s eye is knocked out, “as fate and fortune decreed,” the one pomegranate seed escapes destruction, and the Princess dies in consequence; the beautiful lad secreted in a cave <em>under the earth</em> to keep him from harm, because it is foretold by the astrologers that he will die on a certain day, meets with his death at the appointed hour despite all precautions. This is one of the myriad instances, says Captain Burton, showing “that the decrees of Anagké, Fate, Destiny, Weird are inevitable.” And yet, in the face of overwhelming evidence that Moslems in all things bow to the stroke of destiny, it is singular to note that a Turkish scholar like Mr. Redhouse, translator of the “Mesnevi,” fails to realise this most characteristic trait of Mahometan belief, and confuses it with the Christian idea of Providence and Premonition. The folk in Arabian tales, as might be expected, meet calamity in the shape of death with fortitude. The end of life is not a terror acutely feared as with us. They die easily, and when the time comes they give up the ghost without repining, although the mourning by survivors is often loud and vehement, and sometimes desperately prolonged. This facility in dying is partly due to their fatalistic philosophy, and partly it is the effect of climate. It is in rugged climes that death is appalling, and comes as the King of Terrors, but the hotter the country the easier it is to enter the Door of Darkness. All these things which make the difference between Orientals and ourselves must be taken into account by readers of Arabian story, and the coarseness, as Captain Burton shows, “is but the shade of a picture which otherwise would be all light;” the general tone of the Nights “is exceptionally high and pure, and the devotional fervour often rises to boiling point.” We have shown how Captain Burton has rendered the prose of the Nights, how vigorous, yet simple, is the language, how pleasant is his use of antique phrase, serving as it often does to soften the crudity of Oriental expression. In translating the poetry, which finally will amount to nearly 10,000 lines, he has again started on a path of his own. He has closely preserved the Arab form, although, as he says, an absolutely exact copy of Arabic metres is an impossibility. Like the prose, the verse belongs to three separate epochs. In the prose there are two sets of apologues or beast-fables, which may date from any remote age, one having been found on an Egyptian papyrus; we have next the fairy tales, and these were borrowed from the Persians, whose marvellous poetic old Guebres, who gave to Islamism everything it has which breathes of spiritualism or romance; and we have the histories whose proper names, such as Harun al-Rashid, with that of his Wazir, Ja’afar, give the dates. And so with the poetry. Here and there we have some grand old fragment of pre-Islamitic verse taken from the Hamásah anthology or from the “Suspended Poems;” but more common are the quotations from Abou Nowas, Amaí, and other singers of the <i><span xml:lang="fr">décadence</span></i> who were the ornaments of Harun al-Rashid’s court: and lastly, there are the <i><span xml:lang="fr">pièces de occasion</span></i>, the copies of verses made by the writer or writers of the Nights, and as a rule these are mere doggerel. When the story is a love story the poetry is abundant, the agitated youths and damsels bandying verses to express the intensity of their emotions. Some tales are nearly half verse, and then when we get into parts where the sentiment is less exalted, where the recitals are mixed with humorous touches, such as in the “Hunchback’s Tale,” or “The Barber’s Tale of Himself,” or “The Tale of the Tailor,” we have pages of nearly unbroken prose. A striking novelty in Captain Burton’s translation is the frequent occurrence of passages in cadenced prose, called in Arabic “Saj’a,” or the cooing of a dove. These melodious fragments have a charming effect on the ear. They come as dulcet-surprises, and mostly occur in highly-wrought situations; or they are used to convey a vivid sense of something exquisite in art or nature. We give one or two instances of these little eddies of song set like gems in the prose. Their introduction seems due to whim or caprice, but really is due to profound study of the situation as if the tale-teller felt suddenly compelled to break into the rhythmic strain. The prose ripples and rises to dancing measure when the King of the Age, wandering in a lonely palace, comes upon the half-petrified youth, “the Ensorcelled Prince.”</p>
			<p>“Now when the Sultan heard the mournful voice he sprang to his feet, and following the sound found a curtain let down over the chamber door. He raised it and saw behind it a young man sitting upon a couch about a cubit above the ground: he fair to the sight a well-shaped wight, with eloquence dight, his forehead was flower-white, his cheek rosy bright, and a mole on his cheek breadth like an ambergris mite.”</p>
			<p>It is broken again to bring into fuller notice the perfections of one of the three merry ladies of Baghdad, sitting under a silken canopy, the curtains “looped up with pearls as big as filberts and bigger.” We are told to note how eastern are the metaphors, how confused the flattery.</p>
			<p>“Thereupon sat a lady bright of blee, with brow-beaming brilliancy, and her eyebrows were arched as for archery; her breath breathed ambergris and perfumery, and her lips were sugar to taste and carnelian to see. Her stature was straight as the letter I (the letter Alif a straight perpendicular stroke), and her face shamed the noon sun’s radiancy; and she was even as a galaxy or a dome with golden marquetry, or a bride displayed on choicest finery, or a noble maid of Araby.”</p>
			<p>And prose is not thought adequate to do justice to the natural beauty of a garden “like one of the pleasaunces of Paradise.”</p>
			<p>“It was a garden with trees of freshest green and ripe fruits of yellow sheen; and its birds were singing clear and keen, and rills ran wimpling through the fair terrene.”</p>
			<p>It is a marvel that these cadences have never been reproduced before. They have been faintly attempted by Eastwick, in his “Gulistan,” whilst Mr. Payne simply passed them over, rejected them as of no account. They fall in with Captain Burton’s plan of omitting nothing; of giving the <cite>Nights</cite> intact in the precise form in which they are enjoyed by the Oriental. Beside the verses so characteristic of exaggerated Arabic sentiment, and the rhymed cadences, let like precious stones into the gold of the prose, the proverbs embodying the proverbial wit and wisdom, are all rhymed as in the original Arabic. What Arabists think of this translation we may learn from a professed Arabist writing to this effect:—“I am free to confess, after many years study of Arabic, a comparison of your translation with the text has taught me more than many months of dry study,” whilst Englishmen who for years have lived in the East, are making the discovery that, after all, they have known little or nothing, and their education is only beginning with this version of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>. It is only knowledge that knows how to observe; and it is satisfactory to observe that Captain Burton’s amazing insight into Eastern peculiarities has been put to its best use in giving a true idea of the People of the Sun and a veritable version of their Book of Books. The labour expended on this edition has been enormous. The work could only have been completed by the most excessive and pertinacious application. All the same we are told it has been “a labour of love,” a task that has brought its own exceeding great reward. There is only one regret, the circulation is bound to be limited. We cannot help hoping, at some future time, a selection may be made from the ten volumes, and even as they now stand many of the stories could be read aloud. If the public cannot have the whole work, at least it might have a part, and not be shut out from a masterpiece unparalleled.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Lyttelton Times</cite>, <em>August 25th, 1886</em>.<br/>
			<cite class="scite">The New “Arabian Nights.”</cite></h3>
			<p class="c027">Sir Richard Burton’s version of the <em>Thousand Nights and a Night</em>, privately printed for the use of men and scholars, is now unobtainable. The edition sold off immediately, and the price has already reached twenty-six guineas. The best critics among the thousand purchasers say that the language is wonderful, the words graceful, the rendering of thought, as well as words, most accurate, and the poetry marvellous. The Oriental purchasers say that the language is wonderful, and they declare that they have learnt more orientalism in the volumes than by long years of study.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Land and Water</cite>, <em>September 4th, 1886</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">Some time since I had occasion to speak out energetically about this same work, thinking that a book which, though running only to a small edition, might from its general interest excite the curiosity of those who saw copies of it, and that, within its luxurious covers, matters of prurient crudity might meet the prying eyes of those whom we would guard against such knowledge. * * * Of the vigorous and poetic English of Captain Burton’s translation, its freshness and virility, it is needless to speak.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">United Service Gazette</cite>, <em>September 11th</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">There is a charm and fascination about Burton’s translation that enchains the reader. The Eastern beauties of expression are singularly attractive, and, under careful editing, we may rely on a rich feast of such gems of thought and poesies of imagination as only the resplendent Orient can produce.</p>
			<div>
				<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Court Circular</cite>, <em>September 11th, 1886</em>.</h3>
			</div>
			<p class="c027">Sir Richard Burton’s translation of <cite>The Arabian Nights</cite> is a work of marvellous erudition, and a perpetual delight to Arabic scholars and all who care to read these famous stories as accurately reproduced as possible. But they contain much that is not fit reading for women and for young people.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">London and Westminster Sporting Life</cite>, <em>September 18th, 1886</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">From a private note which I have received from Sir Richard Burton I judge that the supplementary volumes to the <em>Thousand Nights and a Night</em> will be of great and peculiar interest. Indeed the entire set will form a library of Oriental lore of unique value.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Nottingham Journal</cite>, <em>October 6th, 1886</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">That Captain Burton’s work gives delight to the subscribers may be inferred from their encomiums. One writes, “I would give passages of it to the Board Schools”; another goes so far as to say, “It is like a new Bible for beauty of expression, and can you fancy a more wondrous gift than a second inspired Book?”</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Staffordshire Sentinel</cite>, <em>Hanley, October 13th</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027"><i><span xml:lang="fr">Honi soit qui mal y pense.</span></i> Are we not living in a too-squeamish age? First an expurgated edition of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> from the pen of Captain Burton, now a similar act of Vandalism to that book of our boyhood, <cite>Robinson Crusoe</cite>. What there was in the pages of the immortal work of Defoe, to which even the most susceptible could take exception, is one of those things known only to the Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge, to whom we are indebted for this last act of Bowdlerizing.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Civil Service Gazette</cite>, <em>November 2nd, 1886</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">Whatever reason there may have been for limiting to the number of a thousand copies the original translation by Captain Sir Richard F. Burton, his literally correct, complete, and beautiful version of the <cite>Arabian Nights, The Thousand Nights and One Night</cite> tales—a work of prodigious erudition and mastery of Oriental language, literature, manners, and customs—we cannot but think it was a pity to have placed exclusively within the reach of the select, opulent, scholarly, and fastidious few that which would have been a delight and joy for ever to the less favoured of fortune—the countless millions. The “<cite>Arabian Nights Entertainments</cite>” even in the imperfect, garbled, second-hand version which has been current in England for a hundred and eighty years through the French paraphrase by Professor Galland, has been read by all classes, high and low, with admiration of the wonderful invention, marvellous adventures, oriental imagery, charming dramatic scenes, exquisite poetry, varied pictures of Eastern life and habits—with all which the collection abounds. Why, then, when a genuine translation, the work of many years, has been completed by a matchless Arab scholar, traveller, and linguist is perfected, should it be withheld from the multitude, and reserved for the delectation of the learned and the rich. We are of opinion that the Arabian Tales, which are so universally pleasing to the people, should not be withheld from them, as they would be practically if shut up in glass cases, among the <i><span xml:lang="fr">éditions de luxe</span></i> of connoisseurs.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Fun</cite>, <em>November 2nd, 1886</em>.<br/>
			<cite class="scite">New Leaves.</cite></h3>
			<p class="c027">Apart from the learning and labour so lavishly bestowed upon the original edition, there is ever a charm of seeming enchantment surrounding these wondrous stories, which age does not abate, nor time destroy—yet the truthfulness of this translation enriches and enhances them.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Eastern Daily Press</cite>, <em>November 13th, 1886</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">I think I should like to shake the curators of the Bodleian library. Last September Sir Richard Burton applied to them through Dr. Rost, the chief librarian at the India Office, for leave to have a MS. of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> transferred from the Bodleian to the India Office under the custody of Dr. Rost. The request was a perfectly regular and usual one, and in Sir Richard Burton’s case it was accompanied by a distinct promise that no “indelicate or immoral” tale should be translated. There was therefore no fear that the peculiar frankness which characterised Sir Richard’s renderings of previous tales would be repeated. A month—six weeks—passed without a reply from the curators, the fact being that they had met twice without being able to get the necessary quorum of three, and once again without doing anything at all. Then Sir Richard Burton got curt note informing him that at the fourth meeting the majority of the curators were unwilling to lend the MS. At the same meeting they allowed sundry MSS. to be sent to the India Office. Now this not only implies a gross neglect of duty, but it is a wanton insult to a man who, after all, is one of the most distinguished Orientalists of his day. Burton’s <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>, disfigured as they are by the indelicacy of the original, are a masterpiece of idiomatic translation; and as a purely literary work must rank very high indeed. Moreover, the shadow of an excuse for the curator’s conduct disappeared after Sir Richard’s pledge to keep within the lines of strict propriety. After all, learned men have a sad tendency to degenerate into meddling old women.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">County Gentleman</cite>, <em>November 27th, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">Sir Richard Burton’s work has been criticised in some quarters for a too obvious straining after the literal reproduction of the original. In our opinion, such a course deserves rather praise than censure. And, indeed, we would demur to the phrase “obvious straining” in connection with the great Orientalist and explorer’s wonderfully successful representation to English eyes and ears of both the meaning and the form of this marvellous mosaic of Eastern fancy and imagination. That certain words and phrases Sir Richard makes use of are unfamiliar to the British reader is perfectly true. But it must be remembered that they have been made the means of rendering intelligible unfamiliar modes of thought and feeling which are entirely beyond the reach of smug literary conventions and forms of expression. For ourselves, we can honestly say that these very outrages upon Philistine sensibility have been amongst the principal charms of this unequal and unrivalled translation—adding vastly to the vicissitudes and seeming fidelity of the work. The marvel to us has been rather—remarking the uniformly level execution of the whole—that so few verbal ingenuities of the kind referred to have been found necessary, and that so much of the translated prose is English undefiled, albeit of the vigorous and vertebrate order, and so much of the translated poetry has the ring of genuine English verse. We might, however, write pages in explanation of our view of the manner in which Sir Richard has discharged his task without approaching his definition of his work as “a faithful copy of the great Eastern Saga-book by preserving intact not only the spirit, but even the méchanique, the manner, and the matter.” Of the tales themselves, we can, of course, say nothing true that is new, or nothing new that is also true. No romances of intrigue and adventure, of wealth and poverty, of luxury and love, have had such universal acceptance, or received so much of that homage which is said to be the sincerest—the flattery of imitation. And this by means of the garbled and imperfect versions which have hitherto obtained currency in the Western world.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">The Philadelphia</cite>, <em>December 12th, 1887</em>.<br/>
			<span class="sc">Once More in Print.</span></h3>
			<p class="c027">Sir Richard F. Burton is once more in print. * * * * He has some two or three years to serve as Consul at Trieste before he is entitled to a retiring pension, and it is a grievance with the friends and admirers of “the Arabian Knight” that the government does not do a generous thing—that is, “retire” and pension him at once. There is no doubt that the prospects of a prolonged life would be strengthened if he could retire from the Consulate and fix his own dwelling place. And his literary career is by no means at an end. The third volume of “The Supplemental Nights” is to-day in the hands of the subscribers. Like all its predecessors, it contains a characteristic dedication. Thus: “To Henry Edward John, Lord Stanley of Alderly, this the most innocent volume of <cite>The Nights</cite> is inscribed by his old companion, the Author.” It would appear from the Foreword that Sir Richard Burton has had some difficulty with his work. He has reckoned without his host. He says: “The peculiar proceedings of the curators, Bodleian Library, Oxford, of which full particulars will be given in due time, have dislocated the order of my volumes. The prospectus had promised that Tome III. should contain detached extracts from the MS. known as the Wortley-Montague, and that No. IV. and part of No. V. should comprise a reproduction of the ten Tales (or eleven, including ‘The Princess of Daryabar’), which have so long generally been attributed to Professor Galland. Circumstances, however, wholly beyond my control, have now compelled me to devote the whole of this volume to the Frenchman’s stories.” What has happened? Has Sir Richard Burton’s Devils (I use the word in its legal sense) been refused permission to translate? His vials of wrath will be filled to overflowing if that sort of opposition accumulates. Already we are promised a reckoning with the <cite>Edinburgh Review</cite>. Well may the translator of <cite>The Nights</cite> be spared to deal out his “smashing blow” with characteristic vigour. He is like the late Charles Reade in this—he is never so entertaining, to the onlooker, as when he goes tooth and nail for an antagonist. The reader has no cause to complain of the dislocation of the author’s plans. Two of the most famous of the supplemental tales are given in the volume in question making it uncommonly bulky and investing it with special interest. The account of how the originals of these came into his possession is remarkable, but it is too long for citation. The two tales to which I refer are “Alaeddin, or the Wonderful Lamp,” and “Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves.” More disillusion. It is no longer Aladdin, but Alaeddin. It is not “Open sesame,” but “Open O simsin” and “Shut, O simsin” in the Forty Thieves. I dare say there are many other departures from the text of the stories which we have known from our childhood. In Sir Richard Burton’s version “Alaeddin” opens in this wise: “There dwelt in a city of the cities of China a man which was a tailor, withal a pauper, and he had one son, Alaeddin, hight. Now, this boy had been from his babyhood a ne’er-do-well, a scapegrace; and when he had reached his tenth year,” &amp;c. “The Forty Thieves” opens differently. “In days of yore and in times long gone before there dwelt in a certain town of Persia two brothers, one named Kásim and the other Alí Bábá, who at their father’s demise had divided the little wealth he had left to them with equitable division, and had lost no time in wasting and spending it all.”</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Academy</cite>, <em>December 11th, 1886</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">Knowing his profound Oriental scholarship, and amazing gift of tongues, and the vast range of his reading, one could not have doubted that Sir Richard Burton’s translation would be a noteworthy performance; but none, I imagine, were prepared for the fine force and old-world flavour of the style which he has forged for himself on this occasion, or for the extraordinary richness, variety, and quaintness of his vocabulary. Not only has he with characteristic masterfulness pressed into his service any and every word, English or foreign, current or obsolete, that suited his fancy or answered to the need of the moment, but he has not scrupled to coin the lacking epithet when wanted. Thus, the ape-prince is “ensorcelled;” a merchant who sells perfumes and drugs is “a perfumer-cum-druggist;” an aged man “long o’ beard,” is an “oldster;” two warriors “fall to derring-do of cut and thrust;” the Jinniyah of Bassora flies “firmamentwise;” Prince Ajib goes to sea with a fleet of “ten keel;” our old acquaintance the Hunchbacked Groom is a “Gobbo” and an “accursed carle;” one of the ladies of Baghdad wears a “mantilla;” Ja’afar the prudent minister of Harun al-Rashid, hesitates not to propose in good Scottish dialect that “each and every one of us gang his own gait;” and the porter refuses to “stump it” till he has heard the stories of the three “monoculars,” better known as the three one-eyed Kalendars, who were sons of kings. These are but a few examples taken hastily and at random; but they serve to show the curious mosaic-work of the style. “Ensorcelled,” englished from the French, is certainly ben trovato; “derring-do” is pure Spenserian; “keel” in the sense of ships, though surviving at Newcastle-on-Tyne as the name of a carrying boat, has scarcely been in literary use since the days of Verstagen and Surrey; “Gobbo” is Italian, and the porter’s refusal has a distinct Transatlantic flavour.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Lincoln Gazette</cite>, <em>December 18th, 1886</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">Few people know anything of the trouble and the travelling which Sir Richard Burton has undertaken in the accomplishment of his tremendous task. He has ransacked all the libraries of the east and west, and has often undertaken a roving but idle quest in the hope of throwing clearer light on a single disputed passage. His profound acquaintance with Oriental languages and literature is shown at every turn, and, preserving the romantic colouring of the original in a poetic rhythm of expression, he has cast his finished version in a form which is singularly picturesque. While he has wisely discarded the affected purisms under which inferior scholars love to shelter their incompetency, he does not disfigure his pages with gratuitous accents, and he manfully indulges our fond reminiscences of old friends by calling the Caliph the Caliph. Nor is it any fault of his that we miss some of our favourites from his edition, such as Cogia Hassan of the matchless diamonds and Aladdin of the marvellous lamp; for we believe that they were spurious, though wonderfully attractive, and either sprung or took new shape in the fertile fancy of that accomplished and brilliant Frenchman, M. Galland. * * * Still another speciality in this most complete of all Translations is the versical portion, amounting to 10,000 lines. The Arab folk break into verse, “drop into poetry,” on every occasion. When overcome by their feelings they weep and recite verses, or they swoon first and on recovery pour forth couplets or poems of many lines. Sometimes they improvise, or they quote their own Moores, Tennysons, and Shelleys. The young Prince looks at the headsman who is ordered to slay him. “I wept,” he says, “with exceeding weeping until I made him weep with me, and looking at him I began to recite these couplets.” The sentimental stories are profusely sprinkled with verse; one of the charming peculiarities of this form of utterance is its inconsequence, the verses welling up from the depths of a despairing breast, often having little or no relation to the circumstances of the moment. Mr. Lane gives a prose paraphrase of a portion of the poems, but he omits verses right and left. We quote a brief specimen from Lane and the same from Burton, and the reader will judge between them.</p>
			<div class="nf-center-c1">
				<div class="c005 nf-center">
					<div>(<em>Lane.</em>)</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>“We tread the steps appointed for us; and the man whose steps are appointed must tread them. He whose death is decreed to take place in one land will not die in any land but that.”</p>
			<div class="nf-center-c1">
				<div class="c005 nf-center">
					<div>(<em>Burton.</em>)</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">“Bear my body, bear my soul wheresoever you may fare,</div>
						<div class="line">And where you pitch the camp let my body buried lie.</div>
						<div class="line">Cry my name above my grave, and an answer shall return.</div>
						<div class="line">The meaning of my bones responsive to your cry.”</div>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>The <cite>Nights</cite> without verses are like the day without sunshine. They are a most important part of the work. They illustrate character and manners, and the allusions, often remote and strange, require explanation, which is supplied in the shape of informing foot-notes to the pages. As a characteristic example of super-sentimental exaggeration, take the hospitable welcome of a lady, long hidden under ground, whose solitude is suddenly broken by the arrival of a fair Prince.</p>
			<p>“O youth, what sayest thou to wine?” and I answered, “Do as thou wilt.” Whereupon she went to a cupboard and took out a sealed flask of right old wine and set off the table with flowers and scented herbs and began to sing these lines:—</p>
			<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">“Had we known of thy coming we fain had dispread The cores of our hearts on the balls of our eyes;</div>
						<div class="line">Our cheeks as a carpet to greet thee had thrown, And our eyelids had strown for thy feet to betread.”</div>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>If Sir Richard Burton has taken incredible pains with his “cooing cadence” and his verses, and imparted to them their true eastern colour, his personages, his array of characters, his sultans, his wazirs, princes, merchants, soldiers, slaves, his princesses, concubines, houris, slave-girls, and old women, are simply alive and exhale the living East—they are real as any creatures in Lincoln—to use Mr. Swinburne’s simile in his Sonnet on this translation of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Weekly Dispatch</cite>, <em>November 14th, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">The curators of the Bodleian Library are determined to save morality from Sir Richard Burton, so they have refused to let him see a manuscript of <cite>The Arabian Nights</cite>, which he asked them to send to the India Office. Sir Richard has produced some queer tales in his translations of Eastern fables; but as he gave a distinct promise to the curators that nothing that transgressed propriety should be reproduced, their behaviour seems rather shabby. Lady Burton is publishing an expurgated edition of her husband’s work for “household reading”; but no doubt the Bodleian curators will forbid their daughters to look at it.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">The Gazette</cite>, <em>Saturday, December 18th, 1886</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">The most widely circulated translations of the <cite>Nights</cite>, the countless editions, many of them illustrated, give no idea whatever of the true East, and are mere burlesques of Galland’s French version. If only parents could distinguish between the genuine and the spurious, these unsatisfactory imitations would cease to be acceptable, and children in the nursery would be allowed to drink from the real fountain. It would be quite as easy, and far better for the juveniles, to follow the story of an Ensorcelled Prince, of a Magic Horse, or a Bottled Jinni, where the colour is all true, as it is to swallow make-believe attempts of Eastern imagery. But a better time is coming for children, and for children of a greater growth. To know the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> in all their perfection, in all their gorgeous setting, in all their bewildered variety, and in all their truth, we must look to the latest translator. For the last fifty years it is Lane’s version that has held the field, and many people, not knowing there could be anything better, accepted him as final. But, like the Horseman of Brass on the Horse of Brass in the Sea of Peril, the time has come for dethronement, and Lane must yield to a scholar of wider research, to an Orientalist who, during one part of his career, lived as a veritable Moslem, and was indistinguishable from other Moslems. Lane’s idea was to give but a portion of the <cite>Nights</cite>, to please himself and his printer and publisher as to what should be selected, what omitted. If a story resembled another story, he rejected it on the score that it might prove wearisome. For instance, he leaves out “Nur al-Din and Miriam the Girdle Girl!”—despite its great historical interest as connected with Charlemagne and his daughter—because it bears a family likeness to “Ali Shar and Zamurrud;” and because he himself felt unsympathetic he altogether discards the lively story of “Masrur and Zayn al-Mawásif,” a tale full of poetical merits with lute scenes nowhere excelled, and with the most beautiful of all the many gardens in the <cite>Nights</cite>. He passes over the truly Rabelaisian tale of “Ali the Persian and his marvellous Carpet Bag;” he omits the chivalric story of “King Omar bin al-Nu’uman and his Sons”—like cutting “Ivanhoe” out of “Waverley” novels—and for fear of ruffling susceptibilities he suppresses “The Rogueries of Dalilah” and “Mercury Ali of Cairo,” most characteristic of stories, full of fun, frisk and frolic and devilry, opening up new ideas of Eastern human nature. These are but indications of Lane’s arbitrary method, and people have submitted because quite unconscious they have been defrauded, and that treasures have been withheld. At length, however, they have the entire and perfect chrysolite. Sir Richard Burton does not pick and choose.</p>
			<p>Various novelties distinguish the Burton edition. To begin with, a strict account is kept of the separate nights, and the interest of the opening drama is sustained throughout. On each individual Night of the whole Thousand and One we learn exactly the amount and quality of incident related. The dramatic idea which binds the whole sheaf of stories together is kept artistically in view. It is a peculiarity of the stories that so many of them are told when the speaker is on the edge of doom—hardly the moment for collected oration—and the story saves the story-teller’s life. The mighty Ifrit who cuts off the hands and feet of his lady with four strokes, and then sends her head flying, because he thinks she has betrayed him, is diverted from instant vengeance on the suspected lover by the prospect of a story.</p>
			<div>
				<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Scotch News</cite>, <em>Glasgow, December 23rd, 1886</em>.</h3>
			</div>
			<p class="c027">The first issue of Sir Richard Burton’s <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>, limited to one thousand copies, was quickly absorbed by scholars and linguists. It would have been a subject of regret had so remarkable a work remained comparatively unknown. * * * English versions of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> have hitherto chiefly represented them as charming fairy tales. It remained to Sir R. Burton to fully accentuate their wider meaning. In the translator’s words, their “pathos is sweet, deep and genuine, tender, simple and true.”</p>
			<p>The morale is sound and healthy, and at times we descry vistas of a transcendental morality, the morality of Socrates in Plato.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Morning Advertiser</cite>, <em>December 25th, 1886</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">Replete with poetry, and expressed in the graceful, fluent language of the Orientals, this rendering by a master scholar is a real boon, and may be taken as a typical specimen of the perfection to be obtained in translation by the power of an author’s research and enthusiasm.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">The Literary World</cite>, <em>January 7th, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<div class="nf-center-c1">
				<div class="c003 nf-center">
					<div>
						<cite>THE REAL ARABIAN NIGHTS.</cite>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>To many familiar from childhood with “The Arabian Nights Entertainments,” it has come as a shock to be told that the great work, in its true form, is nevertheless still to them a sealed book; yet it would seem that the appearance of Sir Richard Burton’s translation, but a few months ago, for the first time put within the reach of the English public anything like a faithful reproduction of the original. Even this can hardly be said to be given to the public. Only a thousand copies were published, and those at a price that would have been prohibitory to the majority, if the issue had been unlimited. Another obstacle to the general enjoyment of Sir Richard Burton’s translation was, undoubtedly, the too faithful rendering of certain passages, specimens of “an exaggerated mode of expressing thought” peculiar to Orientalists.</p>
			<p>Numbers of English readers, to whom even the incomplete and bald versions hitherto common amongst us have afforded many a delightful hour, on hearing of the Burton edition have felt themselves almost mocked as they listened to its glowing praises, and were told at the same time that it was for ever beyond their reach. Some would, perhaps, rather have never heard of it, and have been left in happy ignorance of anything better than they already had.</p>
			<p>Now, however, all such lovers of the famous Oriental tales have consolation offered them. Lady Burton, deeply sympathising with their disappointment, and anxious, too, that her husband’s great labour, “a deep well of reading and knowledge,” should not be wasted upon a few only, has come forward with an edition of her own which, while preserving the beauty and value of the larger work, will be more accessible to general readers, and, moreover, fitted for family use. The aim she has had in view in editing has been to make as few omissions as possible, consistent with the latter requirement, on which point Lady Burton observes: “I guarantee that no mother shall regret her girl’s reading this <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>.” We may say at once that, having carefully read a considerable portion of this first volume, we think her guarantee quite made good. Of the original 3,215 pages 215 only have been omitted. The translator’s “Foreword” tells how the work came to be taken up, its system, and the conditions under which it was carried out, and its relation to other translations. Here is Sir R. Button’s own account of</p>
			<h4 class="c030">
				<span class="sc">The Object of this Version.</span>
			</h4>
			<p class="c027">“Briefly, the object of this version is to show what ‘The Thousand Nights and a Night’ really is. Not, however, by straining <i><span xml:lang="la">verbum reddere verbo</span></i>, but by writing as the Arab would have written in English. My work claims to be a faithful copy of the great Eastern Saga Book, by preserving intact not only the spirit, but even the <i><span xml:lang="fr">mécanique</span></i>, the manner of the matter. Hence, however prosy and long-drawn out be the formula, it retains the scheme of <cite>The Nights</cite>, because they are a prime feature in the original. Moreover, holding that the translator’s glory is to add something to his native tongue, while avoiding the hideous, hag-like nakedness of Torrens and the bald literalism of Lane, I have carefully englished the picturesque turns and novel expressions of the original in all their outlandishness; for instance, as when the dust-cloud raised by a tramping host is described as ‘walling the horizon.’”</p>
			<p>Although occasionally, perhaps, the formulæ may be a little too “long-drawn out,” and some expressions too “outlandish” for the enjoyment of all, the reading is extremely easy and pleasant. There is in it a charming movement and rhythm altogether absent in the popular translations. Indeed, speaking of the translation as a whole, it is, as compared with Scott’s or Lane’s, especially the former, as a poem to a paraphrase. The very fulness of detail, far from wearying, so fills in the pictures before the mind that one is inclined to linger over them with delight. To justly compare the several translations one must place whole stories side by side. For this there is no space here; but perhaps the comparison of a few brief extracts with Lane’s well-known translation will serve to convey some idea of the greater beauty of Sir R. Burton’s. Dr. Scott’s version differs so widely from either, and is so extremely scanty, that verbal comparison with it is almost impossible. An idea of the scantiness may be formed from the fact that the matter comprised in the tenth night, according to Burton and Lane, extends in Scott from the thirty-first night to the thirty-sixth. The following passages are from the “Story of the Porter and the Three Ladies of Baghdad”:—</p>
			<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line"><em>Lane.</em>—“If of love we complain, what shall we say? Or consuming through desire, how can we escape?</div>
						<div class="line">Or if he send a messenger to interpret for us, he cannot convey the lover’s complaint.</div>
						<div class="line">Or if we would be patient, short were our existence after the loss of those we love.</div>
						<div class="line">Naught remaineth to us but grief and mourning, and tears streaming down our cheeks.</div>
						<div class="line">O you who are absent from my sight, but constantly dwelling within my heart,</div>
						<div class="line">Have you kept your faith to an impassioned lover who while time endureth will never change?</div>
						<div class="line">Or, in absence, have you forgotten that lover who, on your account is wasting away?</div>
						<div class="line">When the Day of Judgment shall bring us together I will beg of our Lord a protracted trial.”</div>
					</div>
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line"><em>Burton.</em>—“If we ’plain of absence what shall we say? Or if pain afflict us where wend our way?</div>
						<div class="line">An I hire a truckman to tell my tale, The lover’s plaint is not told for pay:</div>
						<div class="line">If I put on patience, a lover’s life after loss of love will not last a day:</div>
						<div class="line">Naught is left me now but regret, repine; And tears flooding cheeks for ever and aye:</div>
						<div class="line">O thou who the babes of these eyes hast fled, Thou art homed in heart that shall never stray;</div>
						<div class="line">Would heaven I wot hast thou kept our pact, Long as streams shall flow, to have firmest say?</div>
						<div class="line">Or hast forgotten the weeping slave Whom groans afflict and whom griefs waylay?</div>
						<div class="line">Ah, when severance ends, and we side by side Rest, I’ll blame thy rigours and chide thy pride!”</div>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p><em>Lane.</em>—“Then, winking to the Khaleefeh, he said, ‘There remaineth but an hour; and to-morrow we will bring them before thee, and thou shalt ask them their story.’ But the Khaleefeh refused to do so, and said, ‘I have not patience to wait so long for their history.’—Words followed words, and at last they said, ‘Who shall put the question to them?’—and one answered, ‘The Porter.’”</p>
			<p><em>Burton.</em>—“Then he winked at the Caliph and whispered to him, ‘There is but one hour of darkness left and I can bring them before thee to-morrow, when thou canst freely question them all concerning their story.’ But the Caliph raised his head haughtily, and cried out at him in wrath, saying, ‘I have no patience left for my longing to hear of them; let the Kalendars question them forthright.’ Quoth Ja’afar, ‘This is not my counsel.’ Then words ran high and talk answered talk; and they disputed as to who should first put the question, but at last all fixed upon the Porter.”</p>
			<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line"><em>Lane.</em>—“How good is it to pardon one able to resist! and how much more so one who is helpless!</div>
						<div class="line">For the sake of the friendship that subsisted between us, destroy not one for the crime of another!”</div>
					</div>
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line"><em>Burton.</em>—“How fair is ruth the strong man deigns not smother! And fairest fair when shown to weakest brother:</div>
						<div class="line">By love’s own holy tie between us twain, Let one not suffer for the sin of other.”</div>
						<div class="line">Here are four other examples of the difference of language between the two translations:—</div>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p><em>Lane.</em>—“A damsel of tall stature, high-bosomed, fair and beautiful, and of elegant form, with a forehead like the bright new moon, eyes like those of gazelles, eyebrows like the new moon of Ramadân, cheeks resembling anemones, and a mouth like the seal of Suléyman, her countenance like the full moon in its splendour, and the forms of her bosom resembled two pomegranates of equal size.”</p>
			<p><em>Burton.</em>—“A lady of tall figure, some five feet high; a model of beauty and loveliness, brilliance, and symmetry, and perfect grace. Her forehead was flower-white; her cheeks like the anemone, ruddy bright; her eyes were those of the wild heifer or the gazelle, with eyebrows like the crescent moon, which ends Sha’aban and begins Ramuzán; her mouth was the ring of Sulayman; her lips coral-red; her teeth like a line of string pearls, or of camomile petals; and her throat recalled the antelope’s. In fine, she was like her of whom the poet said,” &amp;c.</p>
			<p><em>Lane.</em>—“Was greatly surprised.”</p>
			<p><em>Burton.</em>—“Marvelled with exceeding wonder.”</p>
			<p><em>Lane.</em>—“Touched the chords with the ends of her fingers.”</p>
			<p><em>Burton.</em>—“Swept the strings with her finger-tips.”</p>
			<p><em>Lane.</em>—“We heard the sounds of drums and trumpets, warriors galloped about, and the air was filled with dust raised by the horses’ hoofs.”</p>
			<p><em>Burton.</em>—“We heard the tom-toming of the kettle-drum and the tantara of trumpets, and clash of cymbals; and the rattling of warmen’s lances; and the clamours of assailants, and the clanking of bits, and the neighing of steeds; while the world was canopied with dense dust and sand-clouds raised by the horses’ hoofs.”</p>
			<p>As we said before, however, for a fair comparison we must refer our readers to the works themselves. Those who will take the pains to read Burton’s side by side with any of the received translations, will, we have no question, recognise its vast superiority in every way. On the question of fulness it is enough to say that if the remaining volumes are of the same size as the first, Burton’s contains more than half as much again as Lane’s.</p>
			<p>We must not omit to mention the explanatory notes. “I can hardly imagine the <cite>Nights</cite> being read to any profit by men of the West without commentary,” says Sir Richard Burton. “My annotations avoid only one subject, the parallels of European folk-lore and fabliaux which, however interesting, would overswell the bulk of a book whose speciality is anthropology.” “The scholar who adds to mine the notes of Lane, will know as much of the Moslem East, and more than many Europeans who have spent half their lives in Orient lands. Such, at least, is my belief.” The notes are brief enough not to be passed over, and are conveniently placed at foot of the page.</p>
			<p>Referring briefly to the <em>matter</em> of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>, we cannot do better than quote the words of Sir R. Burton again:—</p>
			<h4 class="c030">“<span class="sc">The Matter of the ‘Nights.’</span></h4>
			<p class="c027">“The general tone is exceptionally high and pure. The devotional fervour often rises to the boiling point of fanaticism. The pathos is sweet, deep, and genuine; tender, simple, and true; utterly unlike much of our modern tinsel. Its life, strong, splendid, and multitudinous, is everywhere flavoured with that unaffected pessimism and constitutional melancholy which strike deepest root under the brightest skies and which sigh in the face of heaven:</p>
			<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">“<span xml:lang="la">Vita quid est hominis? Viridis floriscula mortis;</span></div>
						<div class="line"><span xml:lang="la">Sole oriente oriens, sole cadente cadens.</span>”</div>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>“Poetical justice is administered by the literary Kazi with exemplary impartiality and severity, ‘denouncing evil-doers and eulogising deeds admirably achieved.’ The <i><span xml:lang="fr">morale</span></i> is sound and healthy, and at times we descry vistas of transcendental morality—the morality of Socrates in Plato. It is, indeed, this unique contrast of a quaint element, childish crudities, jostling the finest and highest views of life and character, shown in the kaleidoscopic shiftings of the marvellous picture with many a ’rich truth in a tale’s pretence’; pointed by a rough, dry humour which compares well with ‘wut’; the alternations of strength and weakness, of pathos and bathos, of the boldest poetry (the diction of Job) and the boldest prose (the Egyptian of to-day), and, finally, the whole dominated everywhere by that marvellous Oriental fancy, wherein the spiritual and the supernatural are as common as the material and the natural; it is the contrast, I say, which forms the chiefest charm of <cite>The Nights</cite>, which gives it the most striking originality, and which makes it a perfect expositor of the mediæval Moslem mind.”</p>
			<p>At the present the first volume only of the work has reached us. We shall give our readers early notice of the appearance of the remaining five.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Queen</cite>, <em>January 27th, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">As regards the text, the poetical portions are exhibited in a metrical form, and all divisions and breaks are carefully indicated. The foot-notes are both numerous and important, and they should by no means be lightly passed ever, giving, as they do, much valuable information, explanatory and illustrative, which the “home student” will profit by. This great effort will be extensively appreciated, and not a few will read and learn more than otherwise they would or could have done respecting those wonderful tribes and nations, among whom still linger so much of the lore which instructs as well as fascinates, not only themselves, but the children of the West. We have read considerable portions of this volume, and compared them with a popular English edition, and, without hesitation, we say that the style of this is far better, and the arrangement very much to be preferred. The colloquial terms and homely phrases, we presume, truly reflect the original, as do some other unusual forms of expression. Meanwhile, we regard the book with much satisfaction, and hope it will receive a hearty welcome from the well-instructed and inquiring reader who seeks wisdom as well as recreation.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">County Gentleman</cite>, <em>February, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">Several of the stories now issued are in the form of apalogues or fables, in which the inferior animals are the chief actors and interlocutors. Amongst these we may mention, the tales of the Water Fowl and the Tortoise, the Wolf and the Fox, the Mouse and the Ichneumon, the Cat and the Crow, the Hedgehog and the Wood Pigeons, and the Sparrow and the Peacock. There is, of course, here a suggestion or a reminiscence of Æsop, but the Arabian fabulists take a line of their own. There are striking differences between the two authors or sets of authors, both in the narrative form and in the ethical quality of the moral conveyed. And this difference may, we think, on examination, be traced to national idiosyncrasy and modes of thought. The fables of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> have less point and conciseness, and less of harmonious subservience of details to unity of effect and impression than those of great Ethiopian. On the other hand, they have greater perfection of literary form, far more splendid imagery, and in some instances more psychological subtlety in the somewhat long-drawn disquisitive, and, indeed, disputatious dialogues in which the chief characters indulge. For our own part, we have found this introduction of the lower animal element an interesting temporary departure from the comprehensive and elaborate, and, sooth to say, somewhat monotonous representations of men and their affairs which form the staple of these gorgeous productions of an ancient Oriental loom. In the story of the Wolf and the Fox we have an example of the justification of the lex talionis, which mingles somewhat curiously with the general exhortations to mercy and forgiveness, founded on the maxims of the Sacred Books. In our notice of the first volume we made some inadequate attempt to express our admiration of the virile beauty and force of Sir Richard Burton’s translation. Only captious critics will consider that he has strained a point in his use of obsolete words and phrases, or in his happy invention of new collocations. As these are invariably conceived and expressed in the spirit of the original Arabic, they present to our mind the aspect of beauties rather than blemishes, and indisputably add to the Oriental flavour of this fine translation. The notes are in themselves a liberal education in respect of Persian and Arabian manners and customs, old and new.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Bat</cite>, <em>February 8th, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">The most marvellous collection of stories in the world is for the first time placed before the English readers. Positively for the first time. Those who know the Arabian Nights, through the charming, but ludicrously unoriental, paraphrase of Galland, or through the solid, and perhaps slightly stolid, rendering of Lane, cannot be said to know the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> at all. It would be indeed a thousand pities if such a book as Sir Richard has made were to be entirely tabooed to the world at large and to women. The matchless wealth of fancy of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>, the amazing wealth of knowledge which Sir Richard Burton has accumulated about it, the glowing virile prose in which these Eastern tales have been imbued with a new vitality, all these should be the possession, not of a poor thousand students and scholars, but of all the myriad readers of books who speak the English speech * * * Now, for the first time, all that enchanted Eastern world is open to everyone. Jean Paul Richter, most delightful of German writers, has dwelt, in his great essay on education, on the importance of Oriental fiction in the education of the young. It is easy to imagine the delight with which he would have welcomed the masterpieces of Oriental fancy which have now, for the first time, been placed within the reach of all who care to read.</p>
			<p>The reader passes at once into the most exquisite world of fancy, where enchanted princesses, caliphs and mock caliphs, wizards, ghouls, jinns, barmecides, kalandars, sultans, slaves, mullahs, and dancing-girls jostle one another in a mad merry world of their own, by the yellow Nile or the yellow Tigris. All the life of the East—vivid, passionate, fantastic, poetic—lives in these entrancing pages, and the reader who knows them, and knows them well, knows more about oriental life and oriental thought than many who have passed half their lives in Cairo or Bagdad.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Morning Post</cite>, <em>February 14th, 1886</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">In the volume under notice are comprised the tales from the 78th to the 275th night inclusive. They are remarkable for their originality and poetic sentiment, and the spirit of chivalry which animates the heroes. The tales of birds and beasts are fables containing a wholesome moral.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Morning Advertiser</cite>, <em>February 26th, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">The poetic imagery of the Arabic masterpiece is presented in all its naive and native charm, almost as far as such a thing is possible, when we remember the immense gulf which sunders the ideas and tongues of the Orients from our own mental methods and modes of speech. The use of rhymed prose by the translator is most judicious, and enhances the impression produced by the Arabic simile and metaphor, as in the following, where Sulayman Shah prepares to send forth his Wazir to sue for the hand of the daughter of Zahr Shah:—“Then he hied to his own house and bade make ready presents befitting Kings, of precious stones and things of price, and other matters light of load but weighty of worth, besides Arab steeds and coats of mail, such as David made, and chests of treasure for which speech hath no measure.” Again we find the same use of rhyme in the Wazir’s mention to the celibate King of the charms of the Princess:—“Know, O King, it hath come to my knowledge that King Zahr Shah, Lord of the White Land, hath a daughter of surpassing loveliness, whose charms talk and tale fail to express. She hath not her equal in this age, for she is perfect in proportion and symmetry, blackeyed as if kohl-dyed and long-locked, wee of waist and full of form.” The couplets in which many of the characters after composing their minds unbind their tongues puts the resources of the Queen’s English to some strain. Here is a specimen of how the emissary of Sulayman Shah “displayed the oratory of Wazirs and saluted the King in the language of eloquence.” When it is remembered, however, that the Arabic verse is improvised, we can afford to be charitable to the not unsuccessful effort of the translator, who has no small difficulties to cope with. It runs as follows:—</p>
			<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">He cometh robed and bending gracefully:</div>
						<div class="line">O’er face and figure dews of grace sheds he:</div>
						<div class="line">He charms: nor characts, spells, nor grammarye</div>
						<div class="line">May fend the glances of those eyne from thee.</div>
						<div class="line">O heart! th’ art not the sole that loveth him,</div>
						<div class="line">So live with him while I desertion dree.</div>
						<div class="line">There’s naught to joy mine eyes with joyous sound</div>
						<div class="line">Save praise of King Zahr Shah in jubilee:</div>
						<div class="line">A King! albeit thou leave thy life to win</div>
						<div class="line">One look, that look were all sufficiency;</div>
						<div class="line">And if a pious prayer thou breathe for him,</div>
						<div class="line">Shall join all faithful in such pious gree:</div>
						<div class="line">Folk of his realm! If any shirk his right for other hoping, gross unfaith I see.</div>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>Still, though the English is a little quaint, and every period in the history of the language is laid under contribution to supply material of verbiage, this very circumstance heightens the effect upon the mind of the reader of the strange scenery, the bizarre situation, and the eccentricity—according to our notions—of the characters? * * * Men who as children have revelled in this narrative of wonders, and then accepted them with implicit and ingenuous trust, will return to it again to find light shed on the customs and manners of the East. The very instructive notes elucidate the text, and so the reader may, as he peruses, not only discover delight for his fancy, but gain information about the social life of lands which, though the Western world has varied and altered over and over again, have for ages remained in their main social features unchanged so much so as to lead many observers to regard them as unchangeable. Down at the bottom of all we read, however, the great truth that human nature is much the same all the world over, and in all ages, in its joys and griefs, its gratifications and its heartburnings.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Army and Navy Gazette</cite>, <em>February 26th, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">Sir Richard Burton was a bold man when he wrote, and the Kamashastra Society of Benares was a bold society when it printed his great translation of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>. Yet the boldness of both has been amply justified, for never before was the golden prime of the Caliphs of Baghdad, with all its Oriental colour, brought so vividly before the reading public. Nor could any demur be made justly to the book, as the issue of a private press, because of the indelicacy, not to say pruriency, that characterised it, since it is plainly inconsistent to judge the morals of one age by the standard of another, and this translation of “The Thousand Nights and a Night” was intended not only to make accessible the great work of Arabian fiction, but also to illustrate the social conditions of those for whom it was composed. It must be remembered, moreover, that in these days refinement has progressed so rapidly that the books even which delighted our grandmothers have become too indelicate for the family circle; and, if we go on in the same direction, it is certain that ere long Swinburne will be Bowdlerised, and fifty years hence who can say that the Laureate himself will escape? There could have been no more fitting translator for the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> than Sir Richard Burton, who is as much at home in Eastern bazaars as the very disciples of the Prophet, who has himself made the pilgrimage to Al-Medinah and to Meccah, and who, as the result of a vast experience of all phases of Oriental life, has been able to enter into the very spirit of the wondrous Arab tales. In comparing his work with that of his best predecessors, in the translation, Mr. John Payne and Mr. E. W. Lane, becomes speedily apparent that the former was weak as a linguist, while the latter driven thereto by the necessity of making a book for the family circle, used his pruning-knife much too freely, and cut out some of the very best pieces—notably, the major part of the excellent story, which is of great length, of King Omar bin al-Nu’uman and his Sons, whereof he has preserved but two small episodes. Another great advantage which Sir Richard Burton possesses over other translators is his exquisite sense of the delicate beauty of Arabic poetry, which has enabled him to preserve in his graceful rendering of the many verses scattered through the stories, much of the character of Oriental assonance and rhythm. We take an example, almost at random, from the first volume:—</p>
			<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">“Shall the beautiful hue of the Basil fail,</div>
						<div class="line">Tho’ the beetle’s foot over the Basil crawl?</div>
						<div class="line">And though spider and fly be its denizens,</div>
						<div class="in2 line">Shall disgrace attach to the royal hall?</div>
						<div class="line">The cowrie, I ken, shall have currency,</div>
						<div class="in2 line">But the pearl’s clear drop,—shall its value fall?”</div>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Fun</cite>, <em>March 2nd, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">We readily repeat our expression of the high estimation in which we hold the superiority of this translation over all others. Many stories are included which have hitherto been left untold.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Bookseller</cite>, <em>March 4th, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">The progress of this charming work continues apace, in the appearance of a further volume going down to the “Five Hundred and Fifty-Seventh Night” of Shahrazad’s world-famous tales. Within the limits of the new instalment will be found several old favourites, such as Harun Al-Rashid and the Slave Girl, The Ebony (Flying) Horse, and The Voyages of Sindbad the Sailor. Sir Richard Burton’s notes which liberally accompany the text, are by no means the least entertaining portion of the book, leading, as they do, to many suggestive comparisons with Scriptural and mythological analogies, and to points of etymology as curious as they are instructive. The story of the “Death-Angel and the Rich King,” by the way, is so closely akin to the Parables of the Rich Fool and the Unjust Steward of the Gospels, that it is difficult to believe that they did not serve as the original of the Arabian counterpart.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Allen’s Indian Mail</cite>, <em>March 7th, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">On reading the first volume again and again the reflection occurred, how little—how very little—the general public know, as to the tales of which the name is familiar in every circle of society. Still more does this fact force itself into notice in the second volume. Not a story do we meet which bears a name linked with the memoirs of youth or the recollections of early age. What is the explanation? Are all the tales, which for generation after generation, have played their part in the nursery, merely idle dreams of a fanciful edition of the <cite>Thousand and One Nights</cite> or are the well-known stories reserved for the last? We cannot say: but we avow with some trepidation, that we have not hitherto met with a single friendly face amongst the two hundred and fifty divisions as yet presented to the public.</p>
			<p>If, however, we have expected against expectation for some landmark to show us the road whereon we are travelling, it must notwithstanding, be avowed that in the present continuation of the tales there is much to interest, and perhaps more to instruct. Apart from this, there is such vast array of wisdom contained in this storehouse of experience and knowledge that the world should be wise, and, therefore, happier in learning what dangers to avoid, what virtues to cultivate, what vices to eradicate. Then, too, as regards the notes by Sir Richard Burton. It would be impossible to exaggerate their worth, their depth, or the insight that they afford into the inner life of the Arabian natives, a life of which so little is known, though so much is talked—a life which has much to recommend it—albeit Exeter Hall is loud in its dispraise, and the advocates of women’s rights are passionate in denunciation thereof. Like all other nations the people of the East have their faults, but who are they which presume to cast the first stone?</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Lunes</cite>, <em>January 3rd, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">Few people know anything of the trouble and the travelling which Sir Richard Burton has undertaken in the accomplishment of his tremendous task. He has ransacked all the libraries of the East and West, and has often undertaken a roving but idle quest in the hope of throwing clearer light on a single disputed passage. His profound acquaintance with Oriental languages and literature is shown at every turn, and, preserving the romantic colouring of the original in a poetic rhythm of expression, he has cast his finished version in a form which is singularly picturesque.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Allen’s Indian Mail</cite>, <em>January 17th, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">The reason is not far to seek, since there never has been a really good translation of this most untranslateable of Oriental works. From such a sweeping assertion must be excluded the happy and successful effort of Mr. John Payne; but this latter work was printed for the Villon Society, and the issue being restricted to five hundred copies, while the author bound himself “not to reproduce the work in its complete form,” the version is and must ever be “caviare to the general.” Such being the case Sir Richard Burton bethought himself that he would employ his leisure hours in presenting to the public a trustworthy and withal picturesque translation of the <cite>Thousand and One Nights</cite>: and who more fitted for such task? * * * * We have no hesitation in pronouncing the present version of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> to be incontestably the best extant. Perfection is not given to mortals, but the tales now appear in as satisfactory a garb as is possible; and henceforth there will be no excuse should the English public fail to become familiar with a work which all should read—the time-honoured <cite>Thousand and One Nights</cite>.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Liverpool Mercury</cite>, <em>March 26th, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">We have read with mingled admiration and delight every line of Sir Richard Burton’s wonderful rendering of the world-famous but never till now adequately translated <em>Thousand Nights and a Night</em>. * * * * At the same time, in any literal reproduction of the ancient folk-stories of a race having different customs and modes of thought to our own there must necessarily be passages which are unsuited to modern English tastes. * * * The first writer who undertook to introduce the Nights to Europe was M. Galland, a Frenchman who made Arabic his study, and travelled not a little in the Eastern countries which border on the Mediterranean close upon two centuries ago. What he did, however, was not to translate the entire work, or even one-half of it, but to paraphrase certain selections from it, to add other stories of Eastern origin thereto, and to dress up the whole in a composite literary style which reflected the French tastes of the time far more accurately than those of the Arab tribes from whose romantic folk-lore he drew his inspiration. Other labourers in the same field—and there have been many—have but too faithfully followed upon the lines laid down by M. Galland. Until quite lately the best European paraphrase of the <cite>Nights</cite> was that of the late distinguished Orientalist, Lane; but even he took an abbreviated edition of the original as his standard, and, while omitting at least one-third of the stories which it contained, failed altogether to reproduce the distinctive characteristics of the remainder.</p>
			<p>This being so, Captain Sir Richard Burton, in the interests of Oriental scholarship—which he rightly judges to be nowhere more important than among a people who have so vast an Eastern empire to govern and safeguard as we have—has for years past been engaged upon a literal translation of the <cite>Nights</cite> which should be worthy at once of the original sources from which it was taken and of his own hard-earned reputation. At the very time that he was putting the finishing touches to his work and preparing for publication, however, he learnt by accident that Mr. John Payne had undertaken for the Villon Society a precisely similar task. Upon that Sir Richard, with characteristic chivalry, stood aside, and allowed Mr. Payne to have the advantage of prior publication; we mean, of course, such publication as he himself contemplated and the Villon Society contents itself with—the issue, that is, of a strictly limited number of copies supplied to subscribers only. Of his rival’s translation Sir Richard Burton, with the enthusiasm of a true scholar, says, “It is most readable; his (Mr. Payne’s) English, with a sub-flavour of Mabinogionic archaism, is admirable, and his style gives life and light to the nine volumes whose matter is frequently heavy enough; he succeeds admirably in the most difficult passages, and he often hits upon choice and special terms and the exact vernacular equivalent of the foreign word, so happily and so picturesquely that all future translators must perforce use the same expression under pain of falling far short.” Nevertheless, though coming four or five years afterwards, Sir Richard’s own edition fairly takes the field, and is likely, we should say, to hold it permanently against all future comers. The notes alone carry it to a point of perfection hitherto unattained. It is the work of a man better qualified for the task than any other living being. On the one hand, we know of no one who is so thoroughly imbued with the spirit and soaked in the traditions of Arab life as the traveller who, disguised as an Arab, succeeded in making the pilgrimage to Mecca without detection; on the other, we know of no translator who has at his command such an amazing vocabulary of English words wherewith to reflect every shade of meaning, every turn of phrase, every subtile touch of literary colour in the language from which he translates. As illustrating his mastery of the secrets both of Arab life and of picturesque English, take the following passage from his “Foreword.” He is speaking of the solace and satisfaction which he derived from working upon his translation of the <cite>Nights</cite> during his long years of official banishment to the luxuriant and deadly deserts of Western Africa, and to the dull and dreary half-clearings of South America.</p>
			<p>“From my commonplace and ‘respectable’ surroundings (he says) the Jinn bore me at once to the land of my predilection, Arabia—a region so familiar to my mind that even at first sight it seemed a reminiscence of some bygone metemphysic life in the distant past. Again I stood under the diaphanous skies in air glorious as ether, whose every breath raises men’s spirits like sparkling wine. Once more I saw the evening star hanging like a solitaire from the pure front of the western firmament; and the after-glow transfiguring and transforming, as if by magic, the homely and rugged features of the scene into a fairy-land, lit with a light which never shines on other soils or seas. Then would appear the woollen tents, low and black, of the true Bedawin, mere dots in the boundless waste of lion-tawny clays and gazelle-brown gravels, and the camp fire dotting like a glowworm the village centre. Presently, sweetened by distance, would be heard the wild weird song of lads and lasses, driving, or rather pelting, through the gloaming their sheep and goats; and the measured chant of the spearmen gravely stalking behind their charge, the camels; mingled with the bleating of the flocks and the bellowing of the humpy herds; while the reremouse flitted overhead with his tiny shriek, and the rave of the jackal resounded through deepening glooms, and—most musical of music—the palm-trees answered the whispers of the night-breeze with the softest tones of falling water. And then a shift of scene. The Shaykhs and ‘White-beards’ of the tribe gravely take their places, sitting with outspread skirts like hillocks on the plain, as the Arabs say, around the camp-fire, whilst I reward their hospitality and secure its continuance by reading or reciting a few pages of their favourite tales. The women and children stand motionless as silhouettes outside the ring, and all are breathless with attention; they seem to drink in the words with eyes and mouths as well as with ears. The most fantastic lights of fancy, the wildest improbabilities, the most impossible of impossibilities, appear to them utterly natural—mere matters of every-day occurrence. They enter thoroughly into each phase of feeling touched upon by the author; they take a personal pride in the chivalrous nature and knightly prowess of Taj al-Mulúk; they are touched with tenderness by the self-sacrificing love of Azizah; their mouths water as they hear of heaps of untold gold given away in largesse like clay; they chuckle with delight every time a Kázir or a Fakír—a judge or a reverend—is scurvily entreated by some Pantagruelist of the Wilderness; and, despite their normal solemnity and impassibility, all roar with laughter, sometimes rolling upon the ground till the reader’s gravity is sorely tried, at the tales of the garrulous Barber and of Ali and the Kurdish sharper.”</p>
			<p>Clearly an Englishman who can thus hold an Arab encampment spell-bound by reciting to them their own folk-stories in their own tongue has at least one indisputable qualification for translating the famous collection of these stories embodied in the “<cite>Alf Laylah wa Laylah</cite>”—the “Thousand Nights and a Night.”</p>
			<p>But this is not all. Sir Richard Burton has a literary conscience which craves to be satisfied, and an imitative faculty, supported by exhaustless wealth and ingenuity of expression, capable of satisfying it. Not content with giving us a faithful transcript both of the matter and of the informing spirit of the great Arabian Saga-book, he is careful to reproduce for us even its mechanism and its music—its peculiarities of structure, the balance of its sentences, the rhyme, the rhythm, the assonances, the cadences, the melody, the lilt, the very jingle of its language. How necessary all this is to the preservation of what may be termed the literary flavour of the original may be gathered from the first few lines upon which we light on turning to a page at random. A king sending gifts and a missive to another king by his wazir commands that functionary “to shorten his skirts and strain his strength and make all expedition in going and returning. ‘Hearkening and obedience!’ quoth the minister, who fell to making ready without stay, and packed up his loads and prepared all his requisites without delay. This occupied him three days, and on the dawn of the fourth he took leave of his king and marched right away, over desert and hill-way, stony waste and pleasant lea, without halting by night or day,” and so on—in which passage, as one sees, the recurrence of the same consonantal sounds, and of rhyming and nearly rhyming words at irregular distances gives a distinctive character to the style of the narrative. Many other passages might be quoted in illustration of similar tricks and subtleties of literary skill, which impart an additional charm to the book, if for no other reason, because they are racy of the soil from which it sprang, and give an air of greater vraisemblance to the translation. But the space at our disposal is well-nigh exhausted, and we are desirous of giving just one quotation from Sir Richard Burton’s “Foreword” as to the matter of the <cite>Nights</cite>.</p>
			<p>“The general tone” (he writes) “is exceptionally high and pure. The devotional feeling often rises to the boiling point of fanaticism. The pathos is sweet, deep and genuine: tender, simple, and true; utterly unlike much of our modern tinsel. Its life, strong, splendid, and multitudinous, is everywhere flavoured with that unaffected pessimism and constitutional melancholy which strike deepest root under the brightest skies, and which sigh in the face of heaven. Poetical justice is administered by the literary Kázi with exemplary impartiality and severity, ‘denouncing evil-doers and eulogising deeds admirably achieved.’ The <i><span xml:lang="fr">morale</span></i> is sound and healthy, and at times we descry vistas of a transcendental morality, the morality of Socrates or Plato. It is, indeed, this unique contrast of a quaint element childish crudities, jostling the finest and highest views of life and character, shown in the kaleidoscopic shiftings of the marvellous picture with many a ‘rich truth in a tale’s pretence,’ pointed by a rough, dry humour which compares well with ‘wut;’ the alternatives of strength and weakness; of pathos and bathos; of boldest poetry (the diction of Job) and the baldest prose (the Egyptian of to-day); and, finally, the whole dominated everywhere by that marvellous Oriental fancy wherein the spiritual and the supernatural are as common as the material and the natural; it is this contrast, I say, which forms the chiefest charm of the <cite>Nights</cite>, which gives it the most striking originality, and which makes it a perfect expositor of the mediæval Moslem mind.”</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">The Academy</cite>, <em>March 12th, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">The second volume contains <i><span xml:lang="la">inter alia</span></i>, the delightful story of Prince Camaralzaman and the Princess Badr ool Budoor, which loses none of its old charm as “The Tale of Kamar al-Zaman,” and gains incalculably by being translated into Sir Richard Burton’s rich, quaint, and picturesque English. The third volume brings another, and a still more familiar favourite, in the story of “Sindbad the Seaman and Sindbad the Landsman,” told with a force and vivacity which make it all seem as true as it seemed in the days of our credulous childhood. In both volumes we find a large number of minor tales which are not included in Lane’s edition; as, for instance, the stories of four chiefs of police, and a whole series of charming fables about beasts, and “other small game.” The long chivalric history of “King Omar bin al-Nu’uman and his sons, Sharrkan and Zau al-Makan” (also one of those omitted by Lane), is a distinct gain in a collection so complete and extensive as the present. As regards Sir Richard Burton’s <i><span xml:lang="la">dramatis personæ</span></i>, treatment and style, we need only say that his foul fiends and ancient duennas are more variously hideous, his couplets more steeped in Oriental passion, his descriptive passages more elaborately rhythmic than ever; while the foot-notes are so interesting and full of information that one only regrets that they are so sparingly inserted.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Manchester Examiner</cite>, <em>March 16th, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">Whatever differences of opinion there may be concerning the translator’s taste or judgment, all will agree that the work in its complete form is emphatically a student’s book—that in the mind of the general reading public it is an impossibility to reproduce the <i><span xml:lang="fr">naïf</span></i> simplicity with which the story-tellers of an earlier age and a warmer clime treated those incidents which a contemporary essayist has happily termed “the enclosed facts of life.” Concerning the original, it is not necessary to speak at length. The <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> is one of the great books of the world, and as a revelation of the outer and inner life of the Orient is quite unique, but it is only during quite recent years that the general reader has had any opportunity of knowing the full extent of its riches. True, English translations have been common enough for the last century, but they have been, for the most part taken, <em>not</em> immediately from the Arabic, but immediately through a French reproduction, often so garbled in substance, and in form as to convey nothing like a voracious impression of the original. Of late, however, serious study of Arabic has become more common among English scholars, and we have at least three translations—those of Mr. John Payne, of Mr. Lane, and of Sir Richard Burton—not one of which can be charged with doing injustice to the great classic. As a mere translations each will have its supporters, and it would be absurd for a critic who is unacquainted with Arabic to say that this or that is the best; but it may be urged on behalf of Sir Richard Burton that he is more than a mere translator, that he is an accomplished Orientalist, and that the best years of his life have been spent among the very scenes with which the ancient romancers deal. Then, too, his personal idiosyncrasy is such that he can enter easily, naturally, and without any strain into the life of which the stories are a crowded panorama, can breathe the spirit of the times and manners, and reproduce it in such wise that we can breathe it too. It is no exaggeration to say that he possesses unique qualifications for the task he has so laboriously and adequately performed.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">County Gentleman</cite>, <em>March 19th, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">Volume III. consists of no less than 83 tales, which bring down the marvellous sequence of stories invented in self-defence by “the liberator of her sex” to the 557th night. Of these tales, while many of the less familiar are full of beauty and suggestiveness, the last, relating the wonderful adventures of Sindbad the Seaman will be welcomed as an old and much-esteemed friend. The old friend, too, though he does not come to us with exactly a new face, offers to our charmed recognition a face much brightened and beautified, and decked with the goodly raiment of Sir Richard Burton’s inimitable translation. Many of the tales are very short, but some of the shortest are really the most delightful. Take, for example, the one recording the generous dealing of Yahya, son of Khalid, with a convicted forger, and the one referring to the Caliph Al-Maamun and the Strange Scholar. The directness and forceful simplicity of these brief narratives, which would merit a high place in any collection of succinct apologues of the virtues, as well as the almost Christianity of their teaching, cannot fail to impress any discerning reader. The note on page 58 to the first of these tales is one of similar commentaries throwing light upon Eastern customs and institutions. At the same time it marks the continuity of Oriental political ideas.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Army and Navy Gazette</cite>, <em>March 27th, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">This volume, bringing us down to the 557th night, and to the fifth voyage of Sindbad the Seaman, includes a large number of stories quite new to the reader, some of them brimful of humour, and others most interesting from many points of view, from which it would be easy to quote endless readable items. Harun al-Rashid, Al-Maamun, Isaac of Mosul, and Ja’afar the Barmecide figure here very often; but more amusement is to be derived from the doings of lesser people, as, for example, the sharp-witted vagabonds who generally escape the chastisement they deserve by some ingenious trick, such as the Oriental mind delights in. The story of Al-Maamun and the Pyramids of Egypt (omitted by Lane) illustrates the mediæval Arabic view of those monuments—viz., that they were rich treasure-houses, which it was desirable to plunder if possible; and there are other tales dealing with crusading times, and with the relations of Christians and Moslems. One great charm of these stories is their endless variety, which prevents them from ever becoming monotonous, and Sir Richard Burton’s English has a quaint and sometimes quite archaic cast which accords well with his subject. As we said, in speaking of the earlier volumes, this is by far the best translation of the <cite>Nights</cite> for general reading, and we are sure, in its present handsome form, it will find a place on most library shelves.</p>
			<div>
				<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Liverpool Mercury</cite>, <em>March 31st, 1887</em>.</h3>
			</div>
			<p class="c027">Then Sir Richard goes on to tell us all about the origin of the <cite>Nights</cite>, their birth-place, and their probable date; the means by which, and the strangely incomplete and inaccurate forms in which they found their way into Europe; the matter and the manner of the <cite>Nights</cite>, the social condition of Al-Islam which they disclose, and the peculiarities of the prose-rhyme and poetry in which they are written. The work—translation and commentary alike—is done throughout with the thoroughness which characterises everything Sir Richard Burton takes in hand; and, in the result, we have such a conspectus of Arab life, Arab thought, and Arab literature as could only have proceeded from the mind of one who years ago was so soaked in Arabian customs and traditions as to make the pilgrimage to Mecca, in the character of a good Moslem, without detection. A complete index to the tales and proper names, and a bibliography of all the principal editions of the <cite>Nights</cite>, fittingly round off a work which, as it can never be superseded, must inevitably take its place among the few achievements of human effort from which Time reverently withholds his destroying hand.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Christian Union</cite>, <em>April, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">Those who are at all conversant with the old productions of this work will readily discover the distinctive difference and characteristic features of Sir Richard F. Burton’s translation, that it excels in originality, style, and graphicness all other editions of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>. No one who has read the work will hesitate to accept. Regard it in whatever aspect we will, it is unique in its production, and will henceforth take the precedence of all other translations.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Morning Advertiser</cite>, <em>April 8th, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">As pointed out in previous notices of this admirable work, it possesses many charms which have hitherto been lost to European readers by the manner in which the tales have been presented to them in the current versions of the narratives. Although these stories, among many other collections, have been in circulation for ages through the East, they have not yet been known in Europe for two hundred years. They were first introduced into Christendom, indeed, by means of the translation of Antoine Galland, a distinguished French Orientalist. They were, as a matter of course, everywhere hailed with delight, although, with perhaps rare exceptions, until the appearance of Lane’s edition, the many translations of the tales into European languages, merely gave the narratives themselves. The numerous and ample notes and philological comparisons, which are profusely scattered through it, and which serve to convey the exact meaning of important words in the text, are not only most interesting in themselves, but are often of indispensable necessity to the grasping of the point of the story. Several examples of this will again be found in the present volume. In some places the translator is completely at variance with Lane, who appears, in the instances cited, to have missed the point of the story, from a misapprehension of the true signification of an important word. A remarkable example of the extent to which the force of the narrative is seen to depend on the skill of the translator, occurs in the story of “the Illiterate, who sit up as a teacher,” in which it is remarked in a foot-note, that Lane appears to have mistaken for a girdle, a word which simply means the usual brazier for the charcoal which serves for a fire, and so to have missed the whole point of the tale. In this volume will also be seen several fine examples of the rhymed prose, which form one of the great beauties of the work. The translations of the many pieces of Eastern poetry which adorn the tales, are most elegant and felicitous. They are also most unique in their character. In many instances obsolete words have been introduced with wonderfully pleasing effect, and in other Saxon words and Saxon locutions in close relation with modern German, from their immediate connexion with the text, the notes are full of learning—geographical, philological, and antiquarian—which contains an immense body of useful knowledge on the matters to which they relate.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Daily News</cite>, <em>April 28th, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">The present volume contains not many of our old friends, like “Aladdin” and the “Forty Thieves,” but is rich in those Oriental stories of beasts, which often much resemble the romances of “Uncle Remus.” The tale of the Animals and the Son of Adam, if one remembers correctly, does come, with a difference, in “Uncle Remus.” As an example of the value and interest of the notes, may be cited the remarks on the “lucky signs,” which add to the value of horses. Mohammed disliked horses with white stockings on alternate hoofs. The tale of the Wolf and the Fox is again in Uncle Remus’s style. It is a very difficult thing to account for the migration of these stories. Even the bushmen have a version of <i><span xml:lang="la">vestigia nulla retrorsum</span></i>, and Professor Hartt was told similar fables by the Indians of the Amazon. Huet, Bishop of Avranches, knew that such stories were current among the Hurons and Iroquois, whose hero, if not exactly Brer Rabbit, is usually Brer Hare. The Sawahílis, also, make an animal very like a rabbit take the best parts. Occasionally, the translation itself needs notes for some readers, who may ask what the Fox means when he sings of the Wolf that “garred me drain eisel and fell.” It will interest some mythologists to know that dawn, in Persian, is called by a name meaning “Wolf’s tail.” Prince Kamar al-Zaman is in this volume in all his glory, compared to which, that of Solomon was mere tinsel. Probably only Orientalists can properly estimate the labour and erudition of these <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>. The notes on the Diamond Valley, and the Roc, and other pleasant marvels are very instructive. The following note is curious. We say melanchólia, with the accent on the o: the Arabs say Malikhulíya, with the accent on the penultimate, and probably, or rather certainly, the Greeks from who we both borrowed the word did the same, as the Greek accent indicates. But how they read their own poetry, on this system, who can explain or understand?</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Spectator</cite>, <em>April 2, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<div class="nf-center-c1">
				<div class="c003 nf-center">
					<div>
						<cite>THE ARABIAN NIGHTS.</cite>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>Sir Richard Burton has certainly conferred a great boon on the reading public, great and small, by this edition of <cite>The Arabian Nights</cite>. <cite>The Arabian Nights</cite> has hitherto been known to us chiefly as Aristotle is said to have been known to the Schoolmen, in a translation of a translation. The work of Galland, a Frenchman who was, according to Lane and Burton, not over well-skilled in Arabic, and who knew little of Arabic manners and customs, has hitherto, in various translations and adaptations, been the source of popular knowledge of <cite>The Arabian Nights</cite>. Lane’s own translation was a little too much like Sir Richard Burton’s <i><span xml:lang="la">magnum opus</span></i>, in being too close to the original for modern manners or drawing room use. And, to tell the truth, it is also a trifle bald and dull. Moreover, it is disfigured to the ordinary eye, much like Grote’s <cite>Greece</cite>, by uncouth renderings of more or less familiar names. It is terrible, for instance, to see Aziz and Azizah rendered by Azeez and Azeezah, to find Sindbad converted into es-Sindhibad, and our old friend the Vizier turned into a Weezer; and to be encountered on every page by some terrible Arabic word for the meaning of which you have to refer to notes, those torments of the interested reader. Sir Richard Burton indeed, does not wholly spare our old friends. But Wazir for Vizier is better than Weezer; and while Lane converts Noureddin and the fair Persian into Noor ed-Deen and Enees-al-Jalees, Sir Richard Burton only goes so far as Nur al-Din and Anis al-Jalis. The most striking novelty in this translation is the preservation of the rhymed prose, a jingle of assonance running through the more lively passages, particularly where love or fighting are concerned. Thus, in the Second Kalendar’s tale, we have,—“Her figure measured five feet in height: her form was firm and upright: her cheek a very garden of delight: her colour lively bright: her face gleamed like dawn through curly tresses which gloomed like night;” and when Sharrkan, the Moslem cavalier fights the Franks, “they fell to fighting and to wheeling left and right, and necks were stretched out to see the sight, nor did they stint from strife and sword-play, and lunge of lance with main and might, till the day turned to night and darkness overwhelmed the light.” Taken in connection with the context, the effect, though strange and bizarre, is not unpleasing, and gives a sense of something outlandish which accords well with the subject. Another novelty is the translation into verse of the verses copiously scattered about the stories, which have hitherto been omitted or turned into prose. It must be admitted that these verses are rather boring. They are mostly of the ultra-sentimental and “high falutin’” order, with exaggerated sentiment and metaphors. Here is a sample:—</p>
			<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">“Had we known of thy coming, we fain had dispread ✿ the cores of our hearts or the balls of our eyes:</div>
						<div class="line">Our cheeks as a carpet to greet thee had thrown, ✿ and our eyelids had strown for thy feet to betread.”</div>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>Some of them, however, are pretty enough in feeling and expression. But the translator has invented a barbarous expedient for plaguing the reader, and preventing his taking them quickly, by placing an asterisk in the middle of each line to represent the couplets of the original. As he does not really retain the metres of the original, there is no valid excuse for thus disfiguring the page and trying the reader’s temper, and we sincerely hope that, if not for later volumes, at all events for later editions, he will abandon this excruciating invention.</p>
			<p>With this exception, there is no doubt that this is the most readable as well as the most complete, or probably because it is the most complete, version of <cite>The Arabian Nights</cite> yet produced. In this first volume we have our old friends the Porter and the three Ladies of Baghdad, with the three Kalendars, the Hunchback, and the silent Barber. But one of the most striking of the stories has not appeared in any former edition,—the tale, namely, of King Omar bin al-Nu’uman and his sons. This is a Moslem chivalrous romance, with all the characteristics of a mediæval romance founded on the Crusades; but, of course, the facts are reversed. Instead of a Christian knight falling in love with a Moslem maiden, and slaughtering her kith and kin by thousands and defeating their treacherous attempts at murder by violence and stealth, by ambuscade and poison, the hero is a Moslem prince and knight, and the heroine is a Christian maiden, and the villains and villainesses are all Christians, and it is the Christians who are slaughtered in their thousands by his single arm. As in the Christian romances, too, the plot wanders off from episode to episode, and, it must be admitted, becomes insufferably tedious, for before the end the grandchildren of the original hero are become the principal personages of the tale. But the leading incident and the opening episode of Sharrkan and Abrizah are worthy to rank with the tales of Sigurd and Brynhild. In fact, it may be questioned whether there is any personage in mediæval romance who outshines the fair Amazonian Abrizah in purity and nobility of womanly character, or any more devoted and chivalrous lover than Sharrkan. But the story does not remain throughout at the same high level, and the fate of Aurora Leigh, which is inflicted on Abrizah by Sharrkan’s father (only darkly hinted at in this edition), and her death by the hands of a negro slave, and the horribly Eastern sufferings that befall Nuzhat al-Zaman, are worse than those which befell the heroines of Western tales of chivalry, bad as they often are. It would be interesting to know the origin of this story, which certainly strikes one as out of its place in the <em>Thousand Nights and a Night</em>; for though its adventures are many of them exaggerated and improbable, yet they are more casually connected, more coherent, and more natural and human and less inverted, than the weird and monstrous incidents of the true Arabian tales. Among these stand conspicuous the Third Kalendar’s tale, with its Loadstone Mountain and its man of brass, its castle plated with red gold, and the inevitable decree of blind Fate; the First Lady’s tale, with its city of stone men; and above all, the delightful tale of the Fisherman and the Ifreet,—the enchanted city with its King turned into marble from the waist downwards, and its citizens into white, red, blue, and yellow fishes that lift up their heads from the frying-pan and recite “verses in writing.” Assuredly the tales that used to charm one’s childhood have no less charm with the added anthropological interest which is lent them by Sir Richard Burton’s translation and notes.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">County Gentleman</cite>, <em>May 14th, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">The well-known and widely appreciated yarns of Sindbad the Seaman and Sindbad the Landsman are brought to a conclusion. The less familiar but most powerful and typically Oriental story “The City of Brass” follows and, though we are far from wishing to join the yelping pack already at Mr. Haggard’s heels, readers of this colossal conception will feel inclined to agree with Solomon that “there is nothing new under the sun.”</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Army and Navy Gazette</cite>, <em>May 14th, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">The present volume brings us up to the 761st “night,” and, like its predecessors, contains a number of stories quite unknown to the general reader. It concludes the history of Sindbad, giving a variant rendering, from the Calcutta edition, of the seventh voyage, and contains a large number of stories concerning the “Craft and Malice of Women,” which are of the highest value as illustrations of social conditions, and it has besides, many tales to which it would be a pleasure to allude individually. * * * As a translation, it is unequalled in fidelity, and Sir Richard Burton’s familiarity with Oriental scenes has enabled him to preserve the greater part of the quaint flavour of the original.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Liverpool Mercury</cite>, <em>August 24th, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">We have already fully described this latest edition of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> and have spoken at large of its merits, both as a singularly faithful translation and a finished work of high literary art. It is the only rendering of <cite>The Nights</cite> which has any pretentions to literalness and completeness, and in this and all other respects is far away the best edition extant.</p>
			<div>
				<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Army and Navy Gazette</cite>, <em>August 27th, 1887</em>.</h3>
			</div>
			<p class="c027">Bringing us up to the 944th night, this volume includes the curious tale of the “Man of Upper Egypt and his Frankish Wife,” and others omitted by Lane. One of the most characteristic of these is that of “King Jali’ad of Hind and his Wazir Shimas,” which belongs to the oldest series in <cite>The Nights</cite> and has attached to it a number of animal and other fables, all very remarkable. Lane found the story “puerile,” and it is very true that from many points of view, it is so; but as an illustration of the ways of Arabian society and an example of a class of stories largely circulated amongst the Oriental peoples of that date, it cannot be overlooked, and if read in the proper appreciative spirit, it is by no means devoid of amusement. The style of the translation, as we have previously remarked, has a strange archaic charm, and the unusual locutions of which Sir Richard Burton is master, harmonize admirably with his subject, while the rhythmic portions, which he has reproduced with so much skill and diversify, render still more picturesque the whole.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Morning Advertiser</cite>, <em>October 12th, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">Several of the stories comprised in this latter group are familiar under other forms in most parts of Europe, and there are few of them which do not embody the practical wisdom and the sound and generous moral precepts which are, as a rule, characteristic of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>. Taken in conjunction with the numerous and excellent notes which the translator has supplied, this version as we have before had occasion to observe, presents the exact sense of the original Arabic text, which the fanciful phraseology in which the narratives are expressed largely assists in realising, while lending an additional charm to the tales themselves. * * * In this volume are contained, among others, the stories of Hasan of Bassorah, of Khalifah the Fisherman of Baghdad, of Ali Nur Al-Din and Miriam the Girdle Girl, of the Man of Upper Egypt and his Frankish Wife, of the Ruined Man of Baghdad and his Slave-Girl, and the long series of tales, fables and allegories, in which the astrologers and other wise men variously interpret a dream which had disturbed the great King Jali’ad of Hind, and on which he had consulted them. Several of the stories comprised in this latter group are familiar under other forms in most parts of Europe, and there are few of them which do not embody the practical wisdom and the sound and generous moral precepts which are, as a rule, characteristic of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>. The volume contains also the interesting history of King Wird Khan, with his women and Wazirs. This monarch was weak and uxorious, and disregarding the sage counsels of Shimas, the chief of his Wazirs, pursued a profligate and effeminate career, as the result of which great troubles arose in his realm, and an extensive conspiracy was formed to get rid of him. Acting on the suggestion of his favourite wife, he caused his Wazirs, grandees, and notables to be put to death after the fashion of Eastern despots. The weakness to which his kingdom was thus reduced tempted aggression by a neighbouring king, and it was threatened with immediate invasion, rapine, and slaughter. From this strait he was delivered by the sagacity of a boy whom he had accidentally fallen in with in the course of a stroll he made <em>incog.</em> one evening through his capital whilst pondering over his desperate position. The stories introduced in the course of the history contain the counsel offered him in the successive stages of his difficulty, through which he is at length conducted in safety and then returns to a more rational course of life. Lane omits this story as being exceedingly puerile. That judgment will hardly be supported by the reader when he now reads it. It is one of the two oldest tales in the whole series of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> as is here pointed out, and at the same time very characteristic. Taken in conjunction with the numerous and excellent notes here supplied, this version, as we have before had occasion to observe, presents the exact sense of the original Arabic text, which the fanciful phraseology in which the narrative are expressed largely assists in realising, while lending an additional charm to the tales themselves.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Glasgow Evening Times</cite>, <em>December 3, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">The third of the five Supplemental volumes of Sir Richard Burton’s translation of <cite>The Thousand Nights and a Night</cite> is in the hands of the subscribers this week. It is one of the most interesting, and (we have Sir Richard’s word for it) the most innocent of the series. It contains some of the best known of the Eastern tales, including “Aladdin” and “Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves,” which did not find a place either in Sir Richard Burton’s translation of the <cite>Nights</cite> or in that of Mr. John Payne for the Villon Society, for the very good reason that they were then unknown except through the French translation of Galland, and were under suspicion of not being of Eastern origin at all. The doubts about Galland’s translations have, however, now been removed, for all his tales have been discovered in Hindustani, and some of them in Arabic under circumstances which preclude these versions from having been translated from that of the French writer. In his preface Sir Richard Burton tells the story in detail, but we need not follow him there. He has now had these old favourites translated afresh, and they form a fitting pendant to his work. He courts comparison of his translation with the long popular version of Galland by printing the English translation of the latter’s Aladdin along with his own. Sir Richard’s notes are, it may be expected, full of curious information.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Academy</cite>, <em>December 10, 1887</em>.</h3>
			<div class="nf-center-c1">
				<div class="c003 nf-center">
					<div>
						<cite>THE KAMA SHASTRA SOCIETY.</cite>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>Sir Richard F. Burton has just issued to his subscribers the third volume of his <cite>Supplemental Nights</cite>, the printing of which was delayed through his illness during the early part of the year. Sir Richard intends to pass the winter at Fiume, where the climate is less trying than at Trieste. He hopes to come to England in May, bringing with him the MS. of the fifth and last volume of the <cite>Supplemental Nights</cite>. The fourth volume is already in the hands of the printers to the Kama Shastra Society.</p>
			<p>The third volume of the <cite>Supplemental Nights</cite> was originally intended to be the fourth; but the order has been altered on account of the difficulties which Sir Richard experienced in transcribing the Wortley-Montague MS. in the Bodleian, as narrated by himself in the <cite>Academy</cite> of November 13, 1886. Students, however, will not regret the change, in consideration of their delight at here finding for the first time the true Oriental version of “Aladdin,” which has hitherto only been known through Galland’s French. As Sir Richard announced in the <cite>Academy</cite> of January 22, 1887, an Arabic original of “Aladdin” and some other tales was quite recently purchased for the Bibliothèque Nationale by M. Hermann Zotenberg, who will shortly publish a full bibliographical description of his discovery. Meanwhile he has placed a copy of the MS. at Sir Richard’s disposal; and from this the translation of “Aladdin,” or rather, “Allaeddin,” has been made. “Ali Baba” is another of the most familiar of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> stories for which no Arabic original has yet been found. In order to produce a genuine Orientalised version of this, Sir Richard has had recourse to the following device. After much searching in vain among Persian and Turkish MSS., he at last found a Hindustani version containing the missing tales, which Mr. J. F. Blumhardt, of Cambridge, helped to English. He was thus enabled to escape from the plan he had originally contemplated—of turning Galland’s French into Arabic, and then translating that.</p>
			<p>In addition to these welcome novelties, the volume is noticeable for its bulk, for Sir Richard generally gives his subscribers more than he promised. We have here the popular English form of Galland’s “Aladdin,” to compare with the version now first made from the original Arabic; and also an appendix of about 100 pages, contributed by Mr. W. A. Clouston, which describes in detail the variants and analogues of all the tales in the volume.</p>
			<p>In the meantime, the Kama Shastra Society has begun a fresh undertaking—the production of a literal and unexpurgated translation of three famous Persian works:—(1) The <cite>Gulistân</cite>, or “Rose Garden,” of Sa’dí (<span class="fss">A.D.</span> 1258), which may be called not unfamiliar in incomplete versions; (2) the <cite>Nigaristân</cite>, or “Picture Gallery,” of Mu’in-uddín Jawini (<span class="fss">A.D.</span> 1334), which has never been translated into any Western language; and (3) the <cite>Behâristân</cite>, or “Abode of Spring,” of Jâmi (<span class="fss">A.D.</span> 1487), of which one chapter or “garden” was translated a few years ago by Mr. C. E. Wilson, under the title of <cite>Persian Wit and Humour</cite> (Chatto and Windus, 1883). For a popular account of these authors and their rank in Persian literature, we may refer our readers to a little volume published by Mr. Bernard Quaritch in the early part of the present year called <cite>Persian Portraits</cite>. Of the three translations which the Kama Shastra Society propose to issue to a very limited number of subscribers, the <cite>Behâristân</cite> of Jâmi—the latest in date but the greatest in reputation—is now ready. It forms a volume of less than 200 pages with a few notes.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Morning Post</cite>, <em>March 19, 1888</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">As is well shown in this volume, there is as much in the manner of these tales as in the matter of them. If Oriental fiction delights our fancy by transferring us from the common places of our workaday life to realms and to communities fairer than any of which we have daily experience here, any aids from language by which the dominance of fascination may be maintained are clearly legitimate and useful. That the subject is worthy of a warm and ornate rendering such as has been bestowed upon it in these delightful volumes is made abundantly evident from a glance at the splendour of the Arabian Empire during the period covered by <cite>The Nights</cite> but particularly in the earlier portion of it.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Athenæum</cite>, <em>May 12, 1888</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">Sir Richard Burton’s complete translation of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> may be considered the <i><span xml:lang="fr">magnum opus</span></i> of one who had already added much to his country’s literature by the record of his own personal travel and adventure. To render the original text of such a work as <cite>The Arabian Nights</cite> into a European language so as to make the reader apprehend the style and spirit of the Arabic is necessarily a task demanding exceptional qualifications; and success in so bold an attempt, were it but partial, would imply the exercise of more than Oriental scholarship. It could only be achieved by one who understood, in all shades and phases, the genius and imaginary, the ways and habits, the tastes and prejudices, the pathos and humour of both Western and Eastern peoples. Probably there is no Englishman living who could have ventured on the undertaking with better chances of success than Sir R. Burton.</p>
			<div>
				<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Liverpool Daily Post</cite>, <em>May 3, 1888</em>.</h3>
			</div>
			<p class="c027">The sale of Sir Richard Burton’s uncompromising translation of the <cite>Thousand and One Nights</cite> was so great that Sir Richard has undertaken to supply five supplementary volumes. The “copy” has just reached the publishers from Trieste, and the volumes will be disposed of on the same terms as the early ones—that is to say, by subscription. The price fixed is pretty high, but so overmastering is the purely literary curiosity in the matter that not only was the original edition sold to the last copy, but the book is now at a very considerable premium in the market. Sir Richard Burton proposes to himself to take a little rest, after which he will commence a work that cannot fail to equal in interest even the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>, and will be much better adapted for appearance on the drawing-room table. Sir Richard is going to write his autobiography—a work that will cover one of the most remarkable careers of modern times. The efforts made in influential quarters to secure an adequate retiring pension for this gallant explorer and man of letters still prove unavailing, and he goes on with his dull, uncongenial work as Consul at Trieste—a place in which he has never enjoyed really good health.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">The County Gentleman</cite>, <em>October 17th, 1885</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">How fearfully cold it is, to be sure! My overcoat is neither lined with rabbit skin nor tipped with astrachan, and I feel the bitter breeze. A friend of mine, who has subscribed to Captain Burton, tells me that if I carried a copy of the first volume of the new translation of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> in my breast-pocket I would find it very warm. I daresay he is right, but the copies published a month ago at a guinea have gone up in value to ten. I suppose the reports of a severe winter have sent the work to a premium. Or, may be, Mr. Stead’s review gives it enhanced value.</p>
			<hr class="c035"/>
			<p>Burton’s new <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> is the book of the season. But, strange to say, it is not to be had at Mudie’s or at Smith’s. Only a thousand copies were issued, and these went to subscribers. And the owners of a copy of the first volume are already personages of importance. School-girls cry for the book, and the Social Purity people borrow it when they can. Inquisitive folk ask everybody if they have seen it, and wonder why there should be so much fuss made about it. Wags look knowing and give evasive answers, but the man who tells the truth sayeth in reply, “because it is the highest book ever printed in English.” The captain is not the only writer that has gone to the <cite>Thousand and One Nights</cite>.</p>
			<hr class="c035"/>
			<p>Burton’s book makes one feel sorry for Rabelais and Stead. Indeed, Rabelais borrowed from the original, and Burton of immortal Melancholy, like his namesake the peripatetic captain, knew something of it. The new edition will be prized by a few students, perhaps, but its chief value in the eyes of many that hold copies of it will be its high qualities. A few of the volumes were to be had in Holywell-street, but these have all been bought up at big prices.</p>
			<h3 class="c015">“<cite>Jehu Junior</cite>,” <cite class="scite">Vanity Fair</cite>, <em>October 24th, 1885</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">As a bold, astute traveller, courting danger, despising hardship, and compelling fortune, Captain Burton has few equals; as a master of Oriental languages, manners and customs he has none. He is still very young, very vigorous, very full of anecdote and playful humour, and, what is remarkable in a linguist, he has not disdained even his own mother tongue, which he handles with a precision and a power that few can approach. He has recently crowned his literary labours by the most complete, laborious, uncompromising, and perfect translation of that collection of stories known to us as <cite>The Arabian Nights</cite>, but more correctly called <em>A Thousand Nights and a Night</em>. He is a wonderful man.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Whitehall Review</cite>, <em>October 29th, 1885</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">The second volume of Captain Burton’s translation of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> has just been issued to the subscribers, who had already become impatient for a second instalment of this great and fascinating contribution to literature. The new volume is, if possible, of even greater interest than the first. It contains the whole of the fantastic semi-chivalrous story of King Omar Bin al-Nu’-uman and his sons Sharrkan and Zau al-Makan, a knowledge of which has hitherto been confined chiefly to Oriental scholars, as Lane only admitted an episode from it into his version of <cite>Alif Laïla</cite>. Some of Sharrkan’s adventures will remind students of other Eastern stories of some of the adventures recorded of the hero of Persian romance, Hatim Taï. As usual, Captain Burton’s notes are rich, varied, and copious, of the greatest service to all serious students of Arabic manners and customs, and of Oriental life in general. * * *</p>
			<p><em>Apropos</em> of Captain Burton’s <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>, a silly story is going the round of some of the newspapers to the effect that some idiot, or company of idiots, intend to address a solemn appeal to Captain Burton to cease the publication of his work. A virtuous journal like the <cite>Pall Mall Gazette</cite> has been shocked by its Oriental freedom of speech, and it and its readers are prepared to denounce Captain Burton up hill and down dale for the crime of translating into accurate English a great Arabic masterpiece. How silly, how vulgar, how uneducated such a cry is must be obvious to any one who has made any study, no matter how limited, of any of the great literatures of the world compared to Rabelais, compared to Boccaccio, compared to La Fontaine, the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> of Captain Burton might almost be recommended as a study for a Sunday-school. We have chosen for our examples authors all of whose works are familiarly studied and easily obtainable. It would be childish to compare Captain Burton’s <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> with other works which we could mention, which are, luckily, less generally known and also, luckily, less generally obtainable; while to compare the morality of these new <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> with the <cite>Pall Mall Gazette</cite> itself would be comparing the waters of the Mediterranean with ditchwater.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">South Eastern Herald</cite>, <em>October 31st, 1885</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">At Mr. Quaritch’s trade sale the other day, Captain Burton made an interesting speech regarding <cite>The Thousand and One Nights</cite>, of which the gist was to show that his translation performs a double office. It is not only a faithful and racy version of the true original, but it also represents a better text than any which has been hitherto accessible in print or manuscript. He, in fact, produced for his own use, and by collation of the existing materials, a careful, critical recension of the original; and his rendering may, therefore, claim to stand towards the <cite>Alf Laïlah</cite> in the same manner as the Latin version of Plato, by Marsilius Ficinus, towards the Greek text.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Angler’s Journal</cite>, <em>November 21st, 1885</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">To such of my brother anglers as consider something warm a necessity when pursuing their sport during the winter months, I confidently recommend the latest edition of the <cite>Thousand and One Nights</cite>, done into English by Captain Burton. There is no pandering to pretended prudery in this work, which is the only translation extant calculated to give one a true idea of the many subtle and hitherto unexpressed beauties of the original. This book is the more welcome from the fact of our having been lately flooded with abridged and castrated editions of the English and other classics; for, as a matter of fact, the excised portions are the only parts of such books that the British public cares to read. But what has all this to do with fishing? I fancy I hear some of my readers indulging in expletives, and language which is best expressed by the natural divisions of these paragraphs.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Morning Post</cite>, <em>January 19th, 1886</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">Everything comes to him who waits—even the long-promised, eagerly expected “Plain and Literal Translation of the Arabian Nights,” by Richard F. Burton. It is a whole quarter of a century since this translation of one of the most famous books of the world was contemplated, and we are told it is the natural outcome of the well-known pilgrimage to Medinah and Mecca. Of Captain Burton’s fitness for the task who can doubt? It was during that celebrated journey to the Tomb of the Prophet that he proved himself to be an Arab—indeed, he says, in a previous state of existence he was a Bedouin. Did he not for months at a stretch lead the life of a Son of the Faithful, eat, drink, sleep, dress, speak, pray, like his brother devotees, the sharpest eyes failing to pierce his disguise? He knows the ways of Eastern men—and women—as he does the society of London or Trieste. How completely at home he is with his adopted brethren he showed at Cairo, when, to the amazement of some English friends who were looking on at the noisy devotions of some “howling” Dervishes, he suddenly joined the shouting, gesticulating circle, and behaved as if to the manner born. He has qualified as a “howler,” he holds a diploma as a master Dervish, and he can initiate disciples. Clearly, to use a phrase of Arabian story, it was decreed by Allah from the beginning—and fate and fortune have arranged—that Captain Burton should be the one of all others to confer upon his countrymen the boon of the genuine unsophisticated <em>Thousand Nights and a Night</em>. In the whole of our literature no book is more widely known. It is spread broadcast like the Bible, Bunyan, and Shakespeare: yet although it is in every house, and every soul in the kingdom knows something about it, yet nobody knows it as it really exists. We have only had what translators have chosen to give—selected, diluted, and abridged transcripts. And of late some so-called “original” books have been published, containing minor tales purloined bodily from the <cite>Nights</cite>.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Bat</cite>, <em>February 8th, 1886</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">Indeed of those who know the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> as they really are, there are three classes and only three. First, there are those who have read the translation by Mr. John Payne, a book with many faults, but which has the merit of being the first complete translation in any language. Secondly, those who know the Alif Laila in its original text; whether that text be Macnaughten’s, Habicht’s, or the Boulak version. Thirdly, and best of all, those who know the translation by Sir Richard Burton, an immortal addition to English literature, and the most priceless contribution to Oriental knowledge that has been made for a century. To the serious student of the East and of all things Eastern, Sir Richard Burton’s translation is in itself a very Alexandrian library of rare, curious, unparalleled knowledge, the Knowledge, that can only be obtained and given again by a man of letters, who is also in the widest sense a man of the world. But Sir Richard Burton’s translation of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> is a book for men and not for all men. It is the text-book and the treasure-house of scholars; but it is not for every-day readers; and above all things, and inevitably, it is not for woman-kind. No woman could read, was ever meant to read Sir Richard Burton’s <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Court Society</cite>, <em>March 4th, 1886</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">Not a little disgust has been excited by the vulgar sneer which a morning paper has indulged in at the expense of Sir Richard Burton. Long neglected by successive Governments, Captain Burton received, after 44 years, a tardy recognition of his services. Straightway, it was suggested that he is made a knight because he translated the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>. It need scarcely be said that his translation has nothing to do with the distinction conferred upon him, but as it is the habit in a certain quarter to denounce the literal translation of the <cite>Nights</cite>, it cannot be too distinctly understood that Captain Burton never meant his work to fall into any hands save those of a thousand students.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Sporting Life</cite>, <em>April 12th, 1886</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">The first two of the five volumes of “Supplemental Nights to the Book or the Thousand Nights and a Night, with Notes Anthropological and Explanatory,” have been issued privately to subscribers, whereof there will be no more than a thousand. We have Sir Richard F. Burton’s pledge. The tales are peculiarly interesting, and are told in English of matchless flavour and force. Volume iii. is dedicated to Mr. Henry Irving in these words: “My dear Irving, To a consummate artist like yourself, I need hardly suggest that <cite>The Nights</cite> still offers many a virgin mine to the Playwright: and I ascribe this volume to you, not only in admiration of your genius, but in the hope of that you will find means of exploiting the hidden wealth which awaits only your ‘Open Sesame!’—Ever yours sincerely, Richard F. Burton.” This is a pregnant hint. As I have before observed, the vast majority of readers of the Englished lore of the East knew worse than nothing of that marvellous storehouse of romance, <cite>The Arabian Nights</cite> until Sir Richard Burton opened it for them. There are countless dramas embodied in the <cite>Nights</cite>, and one cannot wonder that Sir Richard Burton should desire to see some of them shaped for the stage at the instance of his friend Mr. Irving. I may mention here that the third volume of Lady Burton’s edition of the Nights is available. It is as dainty as its predecessors, as well done in point of literary workmanship, and as full of matter.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Whitehall Review</cite>, <em>May 24th, 1886</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">The sixth volume of Sir Richard Burton’s <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> which has just been issued to subscribers, is one of the most interesting of the series to Anglo-Orientalists. For it contains that story—or set of stories—which is, perhaps, of all the tales of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> the dearest to legend-loving mankind, whether Oriental or Occidental—the story of the voyages of “Sindbad the Sailor,” or of “Sindbad the Seaman,” as Sir Richard Burton prefers to call him. Perhaps the only tale which at all competes in popularity with the wandering record of the “Eastern Odysseus” is the story of “Ali Baba,” and that, unfortunately, does not belong to the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> at all, and can only, as far as we know, be traced to a modern Greek origin. Lovers of the story of “Sindbad the Sailor” will be pleased to learn that their old friend remains to all intents and purposes the same in Sir Richard’s literal Translation as he was in the fanciful adaptation of Galland, and the more accurate rendering of Lane. He does not “suffer a sea change,” but remains, what he has always been, the most wonderful wanderer in the whole range and region of romance. Sir Richard Burton’s sixth volume contains, besides, that story of the “Seven Viziers” which in so many forms is a favourite in all the languages of the East.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">The Bat</cite>, <em>July 7th, 1886</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">As regards his translation, however, Captain Burton is certainly felicitous in the manner in which he has Englished the picturesque turns of the original. One great improvement in this version over that of Mr. Lane will be found in the fact that the verses so freely interspersed throughout the <cite>Nights</cite> are here rendered in metre, and that an attempt also has often been made to preserve the assonants and the monorhyme of the Arabic. Mr. Lane frankly stated that he omitted the greater part of the poetry as tedious, and, through the loss of measure and rhyme “generally intolerable to the reader,” as, in truth, the specimens inserted mostly proved to be on account of the bald literalism of the rendering. Captain Burton has naturally inserted the poetry with the rest; and has often shown much skill in doing into English verse the rippling couplets of the original. Take, as an instance, the verses which Mr. Lane renders:—</p>
			<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">“Tell him who is oppressed with anxiety that anxiety will not last.</div>
						<div class="line">As happiness passeth away, so passeth away anxiety.”</div>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>Almost equally literal, and certainly more poetical, is Captain Burton, who gracefully turns this:—</p>
			<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">“Tell whoso hath sorrow, Grief never shall last;</div>
						<div class="line">E’en as Joy hath no morrow, so woe shall go past.”</div>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>And since, in proverbs and epigrams, so much depends on the form, the spirit of the original is well observed, when, for instance, we read in a certain chronicle the lines of one Ibn al Sumam:—</p>
			<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">“Hold fast thy secret, and to none unfold;</div>
						<div class="line">Lost is a secret when that secret’s told.</div>
						<div class="line">And fail thy breast thy secret to conceal,</div>
						<div class="line">How canst thou hope another’s breast shall hold?”</div>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>Doubtless, too—and in this not following Mr. Lane—Captain Burton is right in retaining the original division into Nights: for, as he justly observes, “Without the Nights, no Arabian Nights!” And, besides this being a prime feature of the original, a grateful pause is thereby introduced into these intricate and interminable stories. In the translation Captain Burton’s English is generally picturesque and always fluent. As it is frankly stated, too, has “never hesitated to coin a word when wanted.” Captain Burton, who has passed the greater portion of his life in Arab-speaking countries, mixing freely in Moslem society, and often passing—as during his pilgrimage—himself for a True Believer, is naturally well qualified to translate this “Great Eastern Saga-Book.” Also, since the scene of the stories is laid successively in every country of Islam, from Tangier to India, and beyond, the translator’s intimate acquaintance, made during his wanderings, with all these people and places, stands him in good stead in elucidating peculiar manners and customs, and in this gives him the advantage over Mr. Lane, who had only seen Islam as domiciled in Egypt.</p>
			<div>
				<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">The Sporting Life</cite>, <em>July 17th, 1886</em>.</h3>
			</div>
			<p class="c027">There has been such a delay between the issue of the sixth and that of the seventh volume of “Alf Laylah wa Laylah,” or “The Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night,” “the private subscribers only” to that marvellous work were beginning to wonder whether anything had happened to Sir Richard F. Burton to put a stop to his undertaking. At any rate, one private subscriber wondered, the more especially as many threats had been breathed by self-imposed keepers of the public conscience (journalists, of course), with regard to putting an end to the publication. To make up for the delay, the eighth, as well as the seventh, volume has been issued. One of the dedications is peculiar. It is encased in a mourning border, and runs thus:—“A Message to Frederick Hankey, formerly of No. 2, Rue Lafitte, Paris.—My dear Fred,—If there is such a thing as ‘continuation,’ you will see these lines in the far spirit-land, and you will find that your old friend has not forgotten you and Annie.” It is evident from this that the great African and Asian traveller has leanings towards a belief in spiritualism.</p>
			<hr class="c035"/>
			<p>The more I see of this splendid translation, the more do I feel that we are indebted to the translator (after Mr. Payne) for the first real idea, in English, of the immortal original, and to him alone for a complete reflection of the Arabian Nights. The lustre and vigour of the English compel one’s admiration at every step. In justification whereof I cite a couple of brief passages from the first few pages in the seventh volume:—“The first to open the door of war was Kurajan, who cried out, saying, ‘Let no coward come out to me this day, nor craven!’ Whereupon Jamrkan and Sa’adan stood by the colours, but there ran at him a captain of the Banu Amir, and the two drave at each other awhile like two rams butting. Presently Kurajan seized the Moslem by the jerkin under his hauberk, and dragging him from his saddle, dashed him to the ground, where he left him, upon which the Kafirs laid hands on him and bound him and bore him off to their tents, whilst Kurajan wheeled about and careered and offered battle till another captain came out, whom also he took prisoner, nor did he leave to do thus till he had made prize of seven captains before midday.”</p>
			<hr class="c035"/>
			<p>Again: “He cried out to his folk, ‘At him all at once and assault him with one assault.’ Accordingly they waved the awe-striking banners, and host was heaped on host; Gharib rushed on with his men, and Jamrkan did the same, and the two sides met like two seas together clashing. The Yamani sword and spear wrought havoc, and breasts and bellies were rent, whilst both armies saw the Angel of Death face to face, and the dust of the battle rose to the skirts of the sky. Ears went deaf and tongues went dumb, and doom from every side came on, whilst valiant stood fast and faint heart fled; and they ceased not from fight and fray till ended the day, when the drums beat the retreat and the two hosts drew apart and returned, each to its tents.” Is not that spirited? It is palpable enough that, until Sir Richard Burton’s wonderful work saw the light, we had no “Arabian Nights.”</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Nottingham Journal</cite>, <em>August 30th, 1886</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">The sales of Sir Richard Burton’s most realistic version of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> (a very valuable book in its way, but distinctly a top-shelf one) appear to have gone off with uncommon briskness; with so much briskness, in fact, that Sir Richard has taken in hand to prepare for publication a series of additional tales from the same source. Five new volumes called <cite>Supplemental Nights</cite> are in preparation, and I understand that the first two are completed. It is no disparagement to the scholarly labours of the editor to suggest that one may have too much Arabian Nights Entertainment. The translation of the original work, a unique performance, will always be valued by students and collectors (I am told that it is already worth double the price it was issued at), but a second series might possibly pall.</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><cite class="scite">Whitehall Gazette</cite>, <em>August 5th, 1886</em>.</h3>
			<p class="c027">The current number of the <cite>Edinburgh Review</cite> contains an article of a somewhat foolish kind upon the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite>. That great collection of Eastern stories is receiving a great deal of very deserved attention just now, and any literary contribution to the question is of interest. But the <cite>Edinburgh</cite> Reviewer does not add much of value to the matter in hand. A considerable part of his paper is devoted to a very acrid, unjust, and ill-mannered attack upon Sir Richard Burton’s famous translation. Quite apart from the question of tastes which the paper raises—though whether the <cite>Edinburgh Review</cite> is necessarily an impeccable authority as to taste is at least open to question—the attack on Sir Richard Burton’s rendering is animated by an obvious spirit of small antagonism which puts it out of court at once as a critical essay. To jump upon some small inaccuracy and trumpet over it like the foolish cock in the fable will scarcely detract from the admiration which all Orientalists feel for Sir Richard Burton, nor in any way lessen his fame as one of the profoundest and the most remarkable Oriental students of his time. The <cite>Edinburgh</cite> Reviewer is also pleased to be sarcastic over a reference to D’Herbelot. Does the reviewer really think that D’Herbelot is altogether out of date because he happened not to have been published in the latter part of the nineteenth century and under the patronage of the <cite>Edinburgh Review</cite>? However, Sir Richard Burton’s translation of the <cite>Arabian Nights</cite> will endure as a standard contribution to Oriental literature, in spite of the disapproval of its latest critic.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
