<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="volume-16" id="chapter-16-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Index</h2>
			<ul class="c005 index">
				<li class="c029">“A King and no army,” <a href="#Page_10">10</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Abbús Al-, an intensive word meaning “Very stern faced,” <a href="#Page_232">232</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Abd al-Malik bin Marwán (not to be confounded with the Caliph, the tenth of the series), <a href="#Page_179">179</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Abdullah Chelebi, called in old translation “Scheffander-Hassan,” <a href="#Page_177">177</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Abíkám = “Abicam,” a Chaldæan Astrologer (Chavis) and Abimacam (Gauttier), <a href="#Page_26">26</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Abraham, the “Friend of Allah,” <a href="#Page_104">104</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Abú Sahíh = (flight to) a sure and safe place, <a href="#Page_149">149</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Abu Sumayk = “Father of the Fishlet” (in old ver. “Yapousmek”), <a href="#Page_16">16</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Abú Sumayk the Pauper, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “The Father of the little Fish,” <a href="#Page_15">15</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Addíki = I will give thee (in the language of Fellahs), <a href="#Page_189">189</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Ahádís” esp. referred to the sayings of Mahommed, <a href="#Page_41">41</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ahádís al-Kudus = sentences attributed to Archangel Gabriel, <a href="#Page_41">41</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ahádís al-Nabawí = the actual words pron. by Mahommed, <a href="#Page_41">41</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Ahy Tys” for which read “Tuhà Tays” a general feast (Houdas), <a href="#Page_187">187</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ajdár = Malady, <a href="#Page_162">162</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ajíjíyah, possibly Ajínniyah = a dish of dough, <a href="#Page_160">160</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Akbá’ <em>pl.</em> of “Kub’” = in pop. language, any part of garment covering head (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_48">48</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Akbá’ wa Zarábíl” <em>tr.</em> “Caps and slippers,” <a href="#Page_48">48</a></li>
				<li class="c029">Akhyash Abná Sháh (Second name may be “Shah of the Ebna” or Persian incolæ of Al-Yaman), <a href="#Page_12">12</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Akkál bula’hu” = commit all manner of abominations, <a href="#Page_70">70</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Akyál, <em>pl.</em> of “Kayl” = Kings of the Himyarite peoples, <a href="#Page_232">232</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Álamína (’Awálim) = the (three) worlds, 249.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Al-’iddah” in case of divorcée, widow, pregnant woman, <a href="#Page_178">178</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“’Alái al-Din” = Aláeddin, <a href="#Page_50">50</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Alakah khárijah = an extraordinary drubbing, <a href="#Page_84">84</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Al bin Imrán” probably the name of some Prince of the Jinns, <a href="#Page_126">126</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Alfi Hájatan” meaning “What dost thou want (in the way of amusement)? I am at thy disposal,” <a href="#Page_178">178</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ali, son-in-law of the Prophet (supposed author of Al-Jafr), <a href="#Page_168">168</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Alif, bá, tá, sá” (A.<abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr>D.). The latter written with a Sin instead of a Thá, showing vulg. use which extend from Alex. to Meccah, <a href="#Page_37">37</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Alkermes, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “Al-Kirm” (<em>Arab.</em> and <em>Pers.</em>) = a worm, cochineal, <a href="#Page_5">5</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Allah’s path (a Martyr on) = a Martyr of love, <a href="#Page_131">131</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Almond-Tree “Be not like unto the,” (a <i><span xml:lang="fr">lieu commun</span></i> in the East), <a href="#Page_7">7</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Almond-Tree = the <em>Heb.</em> “Sháked” and the fruit is “Loz” (<em>Arab.</em> Lauz) = <em>Amygdalus communis</em>, <a href="#Page_7">7</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Alms-gift = whatso exceedeth Viaticum (“Jáizah”), or the three-days’ guest hospitality, <a href="#Page_26">26</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Alwán, <em>pl.</em> of Laun, meats of all kinds and colours, <a href="#Page_122">122</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Amírala (wife of Emir-Ben-Hilac-Salamis) meaning, if anything, “Colonel” or Captain, R.N., <a href="#Page_225">225</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ammál (<em>Arab.</em>), vulg. written with initial Hamzah = “Verily”, “I believe you my boy” (<em>tr.</em> “Assuredly”), <a href="#Page_11">11</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Ammál (<em>Arab.</em>) With the Ayn may mean “he intended,” or “he was about to,” <a href="#Page_11">11</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“—And the Peace!” = “There is an end of the matter,” <a href="#Page_105">105</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ant, Koranic legend of the, <a href="#Page_99">99</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Antum fí Kháshin wa básh (an error for Khásh-másh) = a miserable condition, <a href="#Page_137">137</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Anushirwán (in full Anúshínrawán) = sweet of soul, P.N. of Pers. King, <a href="#Page_44">44</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Arafát, fête of; the day of the Sermon, when pilgrims sleep at Muzdalifah, <a href="#Page_41">41</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Arakiyah = Skull-cap, <a href="#Page_48">48</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Aramramí = flocking and crowding, <a href="#Page_195">195</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Arz (<em>Arab.</em>), from the <em>Heb.</em> “Arz” or “Razah” (✓ raz = to vibrate) = Cedar (of Lebanon), <a href="#Page_5">5</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">’As’as = to complicate a matter, <a href="#Page_174">174</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“’Asá Fír,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “Fír is rebellious,” <a href="#Page_102">102</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Asáfír, <em>pl.</em> of “’Usfúr” = a bird, a sparrow, <a href="#Page_102">102</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ashur, four sons of (according to Arabs), <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ashghaftíní (<em>see</em> Shaghaftíní), <a href="#Page_15">15</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Aská hu ’alakah = gave him a sound drubbing (’alakah), <a href="#Page_58">58</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Asshúr = Assyria, <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Assyrian correspondence, the simplicity of, <a href="#Page_12">12</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Asúr, in the text, “Atúr,” the scriptural</li>
				<li class="c029">“Asshur” = Assyria, <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Atrús, King (? Heron’s “Illabousatrous”), <a href="#Page_234">234</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Attaf (named by Heron Chebib, also “Xakem Tai-Chebib” = Hátim Tayy Habib), <a href="#Page_169">169</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Attáf, Tale of (Cotheal MS.), <a href="#Page_196">196</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Attáf, Tale of, title compared with Gauttier and Heron, <a href="#Page_167">167</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Atúr,” scriptural “Asshur” = Assyria, <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“’Ayyik” or “Ayyuk” = a hinderer (of disease), <a href="#Page_174">174</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Ayyúk = Capella, a bright star, <a href="#Page_174">174</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Azm = Koranic versets, which avert evil, <a href="#Page_19">19</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Azzamín = Charmers, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, men who recite the Azm, <a href="#Page_19">19</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Bábúk, or “Bábúnak” (<em>Pers.</em>) = the white Camomile flower, <a href="#Page_27">27</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bahlúl Al- = the “Bahalul” of D’Herbelot, <a href="#Page_155">155</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bahr al-Azrak = the Blue Sea (Mediterranean), <a href="#Page_256">256</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bak’ah (=“a hollow where water collects”) and “Buk’ah” (=“a patch of ground”) compared, <a href="#Page_12">12</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bakar = black cattle, whether bull, cow, or ox, <a href="#Page_136">136</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Banú Hilál, a famous tribe, <a href="#Page_225">225</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bardawán, the well-known city in Hindostan whose iron was famous, <a href="#Page_71">71</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Bashákhín,” <em>pl.</em> of “Bashkhánah” = hangings, arras, <a href="#Page_44">44</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Basíl, son of “Ashur,” <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Baybúnah (<em>prop.</em> “Bábúnaj” in <em>Arab.</em>, and “Bábúk” in <em>Pers.</em>) = the white Camomile flower, <a href="#Page_27">27</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bel the idol (or Ba’al or Belus, the Phœnician and Canaanite head-god), <a href="#Page_26">26</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bell as a fringe to the Ephod of High Priest, <a href="#Page_100">100</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bghb (evidently for “Baght,” or preferably “Baghtatan”), <a href="#Page_78">78</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Bi Asri-hi” (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>lit.</em> “rope and all;” metaphorically used = altogether, entirely (<em>tr.</em> “the World universal”), <a href="#Page_108">108</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Bí, Bí, Bí” (compare the French “Brr”), <a href="#Page_77">77</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Birkat Far’aun = Pharaoh’s Pool, <a href="#Page_98">98</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bisáta-hum = their carpets (<em>tr.</em> “warehouses”), <a href="#Page_124">124</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Buk’ah (=“a piece of low ground”) and Bak’ah (=“a hollow where water collects”) compared, <a href="#Page_12">12</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bundukáni (Al-) = the cross-bow man, <a href="#Page_53">53</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Buyúrdi, Al- (<em>cler. error</em> for “Buyúruldi”) = the written order of a Governor, <a href="#Page_180">180</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Bye Names, <a href="#Page_84">84</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">“Camaralzaman” (olden versions) = “Complete Time,” for “Moon of the Age,” <a href="#Page_233">233</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Camels made drunk with Bhang, or Indian hemp, to make extended marches, <a href="#Page_244">244</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Camomile flower (white), <a href="#Page_27">27</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cat, a sacred animal amongst the Egyptians, <a href="#Page_31">31</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cedar of Lebanon, <a href="#Page_5">5</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Census of the Exodus (Exposition by Mr. Thayer), <a href="#Page_113">113</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Changul” (with three dotted Chím) = red gold, <a href="#Page_251">251</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Chavis quoted, <a href="#Page_12">12</a>, <i><span xml:lang="la">ib.</span></i> 15, <a href="#Page_16">16</a>, <a href="#Page_53">53</a>, <a href="#Page_54">54</a>, <a href="#Page_56">56</a>, <a href="#Page_59">59</a>, <a href="#Page_63">63</a>, <a href="#Page_68">68</a>, <a href="#Page_72">72</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Chenery quoted, <a href="#Page_7">7</a>, <a href="#Page_54">54</a>, <a href="#Page_73">73</a>, <a href="#Page_84">84</a>, <a href="#Page_89">89</a>, <a href="#Page_94">94</a>, <a href="#Page_97">97</a>, <a href="#Page_124">124</a>, <a href="#Page_159">159</a>, <a href="#Page_183">183</a>, <a href="#Page_225">225</a>, <a href="#Page_241">241</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Chifte,” from <em>Pers.</em> “Juft” = a pair, any two things coupled together (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_67">67</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cock and the Fox (Fable of whose moral is that the biter is often bit), <a href="#Page_145">145</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cohen = a priest either of the true God or of false gods, <a href="#Page_109">109</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Conjuration, a specimen of Islamised Mantra (in Sanskrit “Stambhaná”) intended to procure illicit intercourse, <a href="#Page_126">126</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Conundrum or riddle, <a href="#Page_97">97</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Cotheal MS. quoted, <a href="#Page_167">167</a>, <a href="#Page_168">168</a>, <a href="#Page_169">169</a>, <a href="#Page_173">173</a>, <a href="#Page_174">174</a>, <a href="#Page_175">175</a>, <a href="#Page_176">176</a>, <a href="#Page_177">177</a>, <a href="#Page_179">179</a>, <a href="#Page_181">181</a>, <a href="#Page_184">184</a>, <a href="#Page_186">186</a>, <a href="#Page_192">192</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Court of Baghdad was, like the Urdú (Horde or Court) of “Grand Mogul,” organised after the ordinance of an army in the field, <a href="#Page_81">81</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Cousin” more polite than “wife,” <a href="#Page_188">188</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Crucifixion, <a href="#Page_261">261</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Crystalline Isles, <a href="#Page_234">234</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Dabbús bazdaghání (trans. as if from <em>Pers.</em> “Bazdagh” = a file) <em>tr.</em> a “file-wrought mace,” <a href="#Page_71">71</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dabdihkán, a physician (Cotheal MS.), <a href="#Page_174">174</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dabshalímat = the Dabshalíms, the dynastic title of the Kings of Somanáth in Western India, <a href="#Page_23">23</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dahn (<em>Arab.</em>) = oil, ointment (<em>tr.</em> “sweetest unguent”), <a href="#Page_10">10</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dajlah River (Tigris), <a href="#Page_122">122</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Damascus City (<em>der.</em> from Dimishk) called Shám (Cotheal MS.), <a href="#Page_167">167</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dán (with dual Dánayn) and “Wudn” (with plural “Audán”) are pop. forms for literary “Uzn” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_245">245</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dán Al- (cler. error for Al-Uzn = ear), <a href="#Page_245">245</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Darb al-Záji = the street of the copperas-maker, <a href="#Page_60">60</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Darbisí al-báb” (from the <em>Pers.</em> “Darbastan” = to tie up, to shut), <em>tr.</em> “Do thou bar,” <a href="#Page_69">69</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dastúr! = by your leave (<em>Pers.</em>), <a href="#Page_58">58</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dáúd = David, <a href="#Page_229">229</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Death and Life are states, not things, <a href="#Page_103">103</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">De Sacy quoted, <a href="#Page_65">65</a>, <a href="#Page_160">160</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Drachms, Ten = 475 to 478 Eng. grains avoir., <a href="#Page_163">163</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Drinking customs, <a href="#Page_47">47</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Drinking wine before the meal, still a custom in Syria and Egypt, <a href="#Page_192">192</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Dukhn (<em>Arab.</em>) = <em>Holcus dochna</em>, a well-known grain (<em>tr.</em> “millet”), <a href="#Page_130">130</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Durà for “Zurà” or for “Zurrah,” pop. pron. “Durrah” = the <em>Holcus sativus</em>, <a href="#Page_146">146</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Durrat al Ghawwas = Pearl of the diver, <a href="#Page_225">225</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Eastern despots never blame their own culpable folly in misfortune, <a href="#Page_22">22</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Eglantine (or Narcissus), The lowland of, <a href="#Page_12">12</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Elias, Elijah, or Khizr, a marvellous legendary figure, <a href="#Page_100">100</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Emir-Ben-Hilac-Salamis (Heron), <a href="#Page_225">225</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Emir Yúnas (old trans. = Hamir Youmis), <a href="#Page_70">70</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Enlarge the Turband” = to assume rank of an ’Álim or learned man, <a href="#Page_42">42</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Entertainment of Guest, three days, <a href="#Page_26">26</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Escarlate, a woollen cloth dyed red (probably French of the xii. century), <a href="#Page_5">5</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Exodus of the Hebrews, Census of the (Exposition by Mr. Thayer), <a href="#Page_113">113</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Exodus, Story of the, <a href="#Page_98">98</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Falsafah (<em>Arab.</em>) = philosophy, <a href="#Page_29">29</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Fa min tumma,” for “thumma” (“Anon.”), <a href="#Page_91">91</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fa-sáha (for “Maksah”) = and cried out, <a href="#Page_158">158</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fatimé (Ja’afar’s wife, according to Heron), <a href="#Page_169">169</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Fa-yatrahúna” masc. for fem. (<em>tr.</em> “miscarry”), <a href="#Page_31">31</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Fir’aun (<em>Arab.</em>), the dynastic name of Egyptian Kings = Pharaoh (Holy Writ), <a href="#Page_12">12</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“First Footsteps” quoted, <a href="#Page_65">65</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Flogging as punishment, <a href="#Page_9">9</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Furát River (Euphrates), <a href="#Page_122">122</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Gauttier quoted, <a href="#Page_3">3</a>, <a href="#Page_7">7</a>, <a href="#Page_8">8</a>, <a href="#Page_10">10</a>, <a href="#Page_11">11</a>, <a href="#Page_12">12</a>, <i><span xml:lang="la">ib.</span></i> 15, <i><span xml:lang="la">ib.</span></i> 33, <a href="#Page_34">34</a>, <a href="#Page_41">41</a>, <a href="#Page_59">59</a>, <a href="#Page_68">68</a>, <a href="#Page_89">89</a>, <a href="#Page_167">167</a>, <a href="#Page_225">225</a>, <i><span xml:lang="la">ib.</span></i> 226, <a href="#Page_234">234</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Gharím = debtor or creditor, <a href="#Page_77">77</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghashamsham Al- = the Stubborn, the Obstinate, <a href="#Page_256">256</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Ghaush” for “Ghaushah” = noise, row, <a href="#Page_69">69</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghayth al-hátil = incessant rain of small drops, <a href="#Page_241">241</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghilmán (in text “Wuldán”), the boys of Paradise, <a href="#Page_128">128</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ghiyár (<em>Arab.</em>) = any piece of dress or uniform which distinguishes a class, <a href="#Page_52">52</a></li>
				<li class="c029">Ghiyár in Pers. = a strip of yellow cloth worn by Jews subject to the Shah, <a href="#Page_52">52</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Golden Calf of Al-Sámiri, <a href="#Page_160">160</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Guest-rite = three days, <a href="#Page_26">26</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">“Há Káhi Ptáh” (<em>O. Egypt.</em>) = “the Land of the great God, Ptah,” <a href="#Page_12">12</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Habbah (<em>Arab.</em>) = a grain (of barley), an obolus, a mite, <a href="#Page_53">53</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Habíb = the Beloved, <a href="#Page_226">226</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Habib, Note on History of, <a href="#Page_262">262</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Habib, Prince, and Dorathil-goase” (<em>Eng. trans.</em>), <a href="#Page_225">225</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hammam, necessary to enter after Car. Cop., <a href="#Page_171">171</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hanút means either “Vintner” or “Vintner’s shop,” <a href="#Page_124">124</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Harísah = meat pudding, <a href="#Page_159">159</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hasá Al = the Plain of Pebbles, <a href="#Page_169">169</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hasan, the Handsome (in the old trans. “The Hazen”) (Kházin = treasurer?), <a href="#Page_68">68</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Háshimí,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, a descendant of Al-Háshim, great grandfather of the Prophet, <a href="#Page_191">191</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hásil (Al-) (<em>Arab.</em>) = government stores, also the taxes, the revenue, <a href="#Page_60">60</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hátim of the Tayy-tribe, proverbial for liberality, <a href="#Page_167">167</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Haudaj = camel-litter, <a href="#Page_181">181</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Hawánít” <em>pl.</em> of “Hanút” = the shop or vault of a Vintner (<em>tr.</em> “taverns”), <a href="#Page_124">124</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hawar, many meanings of, <a href="#Page_73">73</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hayy = either serpent, or living, alive (<em>tr.</em> “living branch”), <a href="#Page_99">99</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“He mounted his father and clothed himself with his mother” = he sold his father for a horse and his mother for a fine dress, <a href="#Page_105">105</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“He readeth it off (readily) as one drinketh water,” <a href="#Page_5">5</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">He sat upon ashes (may be figurative or literal), <a href="#Page_19">19</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Head placed at a distance from the body (by way of insult), <a href="#Page_15">15</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Headsman paces round convict three times preparatory to execution; a custom at the Courts of Caliphs generally, <a href="#Page_52">52</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Health to you and healing,” usual formulæ when a respectable person is seen drinking, <a href="#Page_47">47</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hebrews and their Exodus (Exposition by Mr. Thayer), <a href="#Page_113">113</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Helios (Apollo), Worship of, not extinct in mod. Greece, <a href="#Page_100">100</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Heron quoted, <a href="#Page_41">41</a>, <i><span xml:lang="la">ib.</span></i> 50, <a href="#Page_52">52</a>, <a href="#Page_68">68</a>, <a href="#Page_72">72</a>, <a href="#Page_167">167</a>, <a href="#Page_168">168</a>, <a href="#Page_169">169</a>, <a href="#Page_170">170</a>, <a href="#Page_173">173</a>, <a href="#Page_178">178</a>, <a href="#Page_225">225</a>, <a href="#Page_234">234</a>, <a href="#Page_242">242</a>, <a href="#Page_245">245</a>, <a href="#Page_247">247</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Hicar was a native of the country of Haram (Harrán), and had brought from thence the knowledge of the true God,” <a href="#Page_4">4</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Himyarite (in text “Akyál,” <em>pl.</em> of “Kayl” = “Kings of the Himyarite peoples”) here = the heroes, <a href="#Page_232">232</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hisában tawíl = a long punishment, <a href="#Page_157">157</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“History of Chec Chahabeddin” (Shaykh Shiháb al-Dín) in “Turkish Tales” of Petis de la Croix = here, “The Tale of the Warlock and the Young Cook of Baghdad,” <a href="#Page_121">121</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Hizà (<span xml:lang="ar">حظى</span> in MS. <span xml:lang="ar">حضى</span>) bi-Zaijati-há” = <i><span xml:lang="fr">le bonheur de ses aventures</span></i>, <a href="#Page_260">260</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hms = Vetchling, <a href="#Page_74">74</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Hobal, the biggest idol in the Meccan Pantheon, <a href="#Page_26">26</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Horseman of the horsemen, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, not a well-known or distinguished horseman, but a chance rider, <a href="#Page_92">92</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Houdas quoted, <a href="#Page_7">7</a>, <a href="#Page_36">36</a>, <a href="#Page_48">48</a>, <a href="#Page_57">57</a>, <a href="#Page_62">62</a>, <a href="#Page_66">66</a>, <a href="#Page_67">67</a>, <a href="#Page_72">72</a>, <a href="#Page_84">84</a>, <i><span xml:lang="la">ib.</span></i> 104, <i><span xml:lang="la">ib.</span></i> 125, <a href="#Page_126">126</a>, <a href="#Page_147">147</a>, <a href="#Page_178">178</a>, <i><span xml:lang="la">ib.</span></i> 187, <a href="#Page_188">188</a>, <a href="#Page_189">189</a>, <a href="#Page_191">191</a>, <a href="#Page_243">243</a>, <a href="#Page_247">247</a>, <a href="#Page_251">251</a>, <a href="#Page_257">257</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Houri, <a href="#Page_73">73</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“How was it thou honouredst us, and what was the cause of thy coming, etc.” the address of well-bred man to a stranger, <a href="#Page_170">170</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Húr (Al-Ayn) feminine counterparts of the “Boys of Paradise” (Ghilmán), <a href="#Page_128">128</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Húr al-Ayn = our vulgar “Houri,” <a href="#Page_73">73</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">“I bade her be the owner of herself,” one of the formulas of divorce, <a href="#Page_178">178</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“I have accepted,” the normal idiom “I accept,” <a href="#Page_81">81</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Ij’alní fí Kll,” (the latter word a cler. error for “Kal-a” or “Kiláa” = safety, protection) = Set me in a place of safety, <a href="#Page_84">84</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Illicit intercourse, (method intended to procure), <a href="#Page_126">126</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Inbasata ’l-Layl al-Asá = “when the night of offence was dispread,” <a href="#Page_243">243</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Irán (father of the Furs = Persians, etc.) son of “Ashur,” <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Isá, according to Moslems, was not begotten in the normal way, <a href="#Page_100">100</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Is’hák = Isaac (Abraham and Isaac), <a href="#Page_104">104</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Is’háku kána ’l-Zabíh = Isaac was the victim, <a href="#Page_104">104</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ishmael not Isaac made the hero by mod. Moslems of the story “Abraham, and Isaac,” <a href="#Page_104">104</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Islam Al- is based upon the fundamental idea of a Republic, <a href="#Page_194">194</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Israel, history of the name, <a href="#Page_100">100</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Israelite, now polite synonym for Jew, <a href="#Page_100">100</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ittikà (viiith of ✓ wakà); the form Takwà gen. used = fearing God, <a href="#Page_96">96</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Jabal Ka’ka’án, the highest parts of Meccah, inhabited by the Jurham tribe (so called from their clashing armour and arms), <a href="#Page_131">131</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jafr, supposed to mean a skin (camel’s or dog’s) prepared as parchment for writing, <a href="#Page_168">168</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jafr Al-, a cabalistic book, prognosticating all that will ever happen to Moslems, <a href="#Page_168">168</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jafr-Al-, confused with “Ja’afar bin Tayyár” the Jinni, <a href="#Page_168">168</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jaftáwát (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>pl.</em> of <em>Turk.</em> “Chifút” = a Jew, or mean fellow, <a href="#Page_67">67</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jáizah (viaticum) = a day and night, <a href="#Page_26">26</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jalak, the older name of Damascus, the “Smile of the Prophet,” <a href="#Page_167">167</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Jamarát of the Arabs” = Banú Numayr, Banú Háris, and Banú Dabbah, <a href="#Page_7">7</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jámí al-Amawí (<em>Arab.</em>) Cathedral Mosque of the Ommiades, one of the Wonders of the Moslem World, <a href="#Page_172">172</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Jamrah” (<em>Arab.</em>) a word of doubtful origin, applied to a self dependent tribe (<em>tr.</em> “live coal”), <a href="#Page_7">7</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Janánan may also read “Jinánan” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_138">138</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Janánan (? <em>vulg.</em> form of “Jannatan” = the garden (of Paradise)) <em>tr.</em> “the garths of Paradise,” <a href="#Page_138">138</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jarazat Kuzbán (<em>pl.</em> of Kazíb) = long and slender sticks, <a href="#Page_76">76</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jarír bin ’Abd al-Masíh (Mutalammis, a poet of The Ignorance), <a href="#Page_94">94</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jarmúk, son of “Ashur,” <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jawádit Al- = animals freshly slain, <a href="#Page_257">257</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jawákín (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>pl.</em> of Arab. Jaukán for <em>Pers.</em> “Chaugán,” a crooked stick (used in Polo), <a href="#Page_125">125</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Jayb” = the breast of a gown, also used in sense of a pocket, <a href="#Page_42">42</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jayyid, <em>der.</em> from root “Jaud” = to excel. (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_5">5</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jehovah, the tribal deity of the Jews, <a href="#Page_4">4</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jerusalem, Temple of, a <i><span xml:lang="la">fac simile</span></i> of the orig. built by Jehovah in the lowest heaven, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, that of the moon, <a href="#Page_105">105</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jím (j) with 3 dots, a Persian letter still preserved in Arabic alphabets of Marocco, etc., <a href="#Page_182">182</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jinn “Curiosity,” <a href="#Page_62">62</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jinn (<em>Arab.</em>) = spirit or energy of a man, <a href="#Page_183">183</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Jund (<em>Arab. pl.</em> “Junúd”) = “guards,” a term mostly applied to regular troops under Government, <a href="#Page_16">16</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Juráb al-’uddah (<em>Arab.</em>) <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, The manacles, fetters, etc., <a href="#Page_78">78</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Júrah Syán” for “Jurah Sayyál” = a stinking fosse a-flowing, <a href="#Page_35">35</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Ká’ah = a saloon, <a href="#Page_61">61</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kabad = liver, sky vault, the handle or grip of a bow (<em>tr.</em> here “belly” of the bow), <a href="#Page_257">257</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kábil-ki (? <em>cler.</em> error for Kátil-ki = Allah strike thee<a id="t268"/> dead) <em>tr.</em> “Allah requite thee,” <a href="#Page_55">55</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kabá (<em>Pers.</em>) = a short coat or tunic, <a href="#Page_48">48</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kabírah = head of the household (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> the mother), <a href="#Page_83">83</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kabr al-Sitt, wherein Sitt Zaynab is supposed to lie buried (<em>tr.</em> “Lady’s Tomb”), <a href="#Page_171">171</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Káfi’ah Al- = parapet, <a href="#Page_72">72</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kahana (<em>Heb.</em>) = he ministered (priests’ offices or other business), <a href="#Page_109">109</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kahbah = our whore (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> hired woman), <a href="#Page_46">46</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Káhin = a Cohen, a Jewish Priest, a soothsayer, <a href="#Page_109">109</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kahramánah, a word of many senses, <a href="#Page_89">89</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ka’ka’ = “jingle and jangle” (of horses’ tramp), <a href="#Page_131">131</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kála ’l-Ráwí = quoth the reciter, <a href="#Page_227">227</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kál (al-Ráwí) = “the Reciter saith” (a formula omitted here), <a href="#Page_15">15</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kamar al-Ashráf = Moon of the Nobles, <a href="#Page_226">226</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kamar al-Zamán (“Moon of the Time”), <a href="#Page_233">233</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Kamá zukira fí Dayli-h” = “Let it be, as is said, in the tail,” <a href="#Page_126">126</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kamburisíyah = clotted curd, <a href="#Page_159">159</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kamal (<em>Arab.</em>) = Louse, <a href="#Page_99">99</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kapú Katkhúdási = the agent which every Governor is obliged to keep at Constantinople, <a href="#Page_180">180</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kapú = a door, a house, or a Government office, <a href="#Page_179">179</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kapújí = a porter. Kapújí-báshí = head porter, <a href="#Page_179">179</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Karz (<em>Arab.</em>) = moneys lent in interest without fixed term of payment, as <em>opp.</em> to “Dayn,” <a href="#Page_29">29</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Káshán (Well of), proverbial for its depth, <a href="#Page_127">127</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kasím (an unusual word), <em>tr.</em> “tax tribute,” <a href="#Page_18">18</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">(Kataba) Zayjata-há = marriage-writ, <a href="#Page_259">259</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Katá grouse, <a href="#Page_65">65</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Katáif (<em>pl.</em>) = Katífah-cakes, a kind of pancake, <a href="#Page_45">45</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kátal-ki = Allah strike thee dead, <a href="#Page_55">55</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Katalú-ní = killed me, <a href="#Page_185">185</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kaunayn (<em>Arab.</em>) = the two entities, this world and other world (<em>tr.</em> here “Two Beings”), <a href="#Page_249">249</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kaus al-Bunduk (or Bundúk) (<em>Arab.</em>) = a pellet-bow, (<em>Ital.</em> arcobugio, <em>Eng.</em> arquebuse), <a href="#Page_53">53</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kawání al- (<em>pl.</em> of Kanát) = the spears (<em>tr.</em> there “punishment”), also read “al-Ghawání” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_147">147</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kayf = joy, the pleasure of living, <a href="#Page_174">174</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kazafa (<em>Arab.</em>) = threw up, vomited, <a href="#Page_135">135</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kazi bade ancient dame precede him (on reaching door), lest he happen to meet an unveiled woman upon the upper stairs, <a href="#Page_58">58</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Keyhole (Eastern) cannot be spied through, the holes being in the bolt, <a href="#Page_54">54</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khabata = “He (the camel) pawed the ground” (<em>tr.</em> “beateth the bough”), <a href="#Page_28">28</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khatíb = a preacher (not Kátíb = a writer), <a href="#Page_240">240</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khatt Hajar, a province, <a href="#Page_230">230</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Khayr” (<em>Arab.</em>) = “’Tis well,” a word of good omen, <a href="#Page_58">58</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Khila’t dakk al-Matrakah, <em>tr.</em> “whereon plates of gold were hammered” (an especial kind of brocade), <a href="#Page_81">81</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kikán (<em>pl.</em> of Kík) <em>tr.</em> “raven,” <a href="#Page_147">147</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kinnab = hemp, <a href="#Page_62">62</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kintár = a quintal, <a href="#Page_98">98</a> to 99 lbs. avoir, (in round numbers, a cwt.), <a href="#Page_29">29</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kirm Al- (<em>Arab.</em> and <em>Pers.</em>) = a worm, <a href="#Page_5">5</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kirsh (<em>Arab.</em>) = piastre, <a href="#Page_175">175</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kishk = ground wheat, etc., eaten with sheep’s milk soured, etc., <a href="#Page_160">160</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kís = usually the <i><span xml:lang="fr">Giberne</span></i> or pellet-bag (here the “bow cover”), <a href="#Page_53">53</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kit’ah humrah = a small quantity of red brickdust to which wonderful medicinal powers are ascribed (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_125">125</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Koran quoted, <a href="#Page_100">100</a>, <a href="#Page_104">104</a>, <a href="#Page_156">156</a>, <a href="#Page_157">157</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Kubbat al-’Asáfír” = the Dome of the Birds, <a href="#Page_181">181</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Kullu Shayyin lí mu’as’as” = all is excitement, <a href="#Page_174">174</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Kúl,” <em>vulg.</em> for “Kul” = “tell me”; a constant form in this MS., <a href="#Page_5">5</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kunná nu’tíhu li-ahad = we should have given him to someone (<em>Dr. Steingass</em> also explains), <a href="#Page_73">73</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Kunyah (<em>Arab.</em>), the pop. mispronunciation of “Kinyah” = “bye name” (gen. taken from favourite son), <a href="#Page_83">83</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Lane quoted, <a href="#Page_46">46</a>, <a href="#Page_53">53</a>, <a href="#Page_74">74</a>, <a href="#Page_178">178</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Letters of Mutalammis” (“Uriah’s letters”) are a <i><span xml:lang="fr">lieu commun</span></i> in the East, <a href="#Page_94">94</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Libás (<em>Arab.</em>) = clothes in general (<em>tr.</em> “habit”), <a href="#Page_103">103</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Live thy head, O King, for ever and aye!” (a formula announcing death of supposed enemy), <a href="#Page_17">17</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Liyah (? Liyyah) = Lign-aloes, <a href="#Page_125">125</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Lodging in the Khan, <a href="#Page_95">95</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Love-fit distinguished by the pulse or similar obscure symptoms, <a href="#Page_174">174</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Love thy friends and hate thy foes,” the religion of nature, <a href="#Page_34">34</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Low-caste and uneducated men rise suddenly to a high degree, <a href="#Page_194">194</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Loz” (<em>Heb.</em> and “Lauz” <em>Arab.</em>) = fruit of the Almond-tree = <em>Amygdalus communis</em>, <a href="#Page_7">7</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Ma’adabah = wake or funeral feast before death, <a href="#Page_16">16</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Made small their sleeves and breasts” = habited themselves in the garments of little people, <a href="#Page_42">42</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mahmá = as often as = Kullu-má, <a href="#Page_54">54</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mail-coat Davidian (Heron, “A massy cuirass of Haoudi”), <a href="#Page_242">242</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Manetho’s account of Moses, <a href="#Page_112">112</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Man metamorphosed into a woman, <a href="#Page_136">136</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Man with El, or God = Israel, <a href="#Page_100">100</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Marj = the open grassy space on left bank of Baradah (Damascus) River, <a href="#Page_169">169</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Mashá’ilíyah jaftáwát wa fánúsín” = “(cresset) bearers of double torches and lanterns” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_67">67</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mas’h <em>tr.</em> “robe” (of hair), <a href="#Page_157">157</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Massa-hu’l Fakr = poverty touched him, <a href="#Page_105">105</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Masser, Grand Cairo; having been built by Misraim, Son of Cham, <a href="#Page_25">25</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Matamor (<em>Arab.</em> “Matmúrah”) = Sardábah, a silo for storing grain, etc., <a href="#Page_17">17</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Matáyá Al- = Wight, <a href="#Page_162">162</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mayzar (<em>Pers.</em>) = a turband; in <em>Arab.</em> “Miizar” = a girdle, a waistcloth, <a href="#Page_53">53</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mazrab Al- = the care of the place, <a href="#Page_251">251</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mazlúm (Al-) = the wronged, <a href="#Page_59">59</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Miizar (<em>Arab.</em>) = a girdle, a waistcloth, <a href="#Page_53">53</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Mík! Mík!” an onomatopy like “Couïc, Couïc,” <a href="#Page_158">158</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Míná = a port, both in old <em>Egypt.</em> and mod. <em>Pers.</em>, <a href="#Page_258">258</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Min al-’Án wa sá’idan” <em>lit.</em> = from this moment upwards, <a href="#Page_189">189</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mi’ráj = ascent to heaven made by Apostle and return therefrom, etc.—History of, <a href="#Page_121">121</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mirza Mohammed Husayn Khan, originally a Bakkál (greengrocer) made premier of Fath Ali Shah’s Court, <a href="#Page_194">194</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Miskál is the weight of a dinar = 1½ dirham = 71–72 grains avoir., <a href="#Page_244">244</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Misraim (the dual Misrs), <a href="#Page_12">12</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Mizr” in Assyrian = “Musur,” in Heb. = “Misraim,” in Arab. “Misr,” corrupted to Masser, <a href="#Page_12">12</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Moses (by name Osarsiph = Osiris-Sapi), history of (by Manetho), <a href="#Page_112">112</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Mother of Hospitality” is the Sikbáj (<em>Pers.</em> Sikbá) = principal dish set before guests, <a href="#Page_159">159</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Mother of Strengthening” (meat pudding), <a href="#Page_159">159</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mother, the head of the household (Kabírah), <a href="#Page_83">83</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Muábalát min shaani-ká” = (From early dawn) I have wearied myself, <a href="#Page_178">178</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mukábalah, the third form of “Kabila” = requital, retaliation (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_55">55</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mukrif = <em>lit.</em> born of a slave father and free mother (<em>tr.</em> “blamed lad,”) <a href="#Page_137">137</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mulberry-tree in Italy bears leaves till the end of October, and the foliage is as bright as spring verdure, <a href="#Page_7">7</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Murakhkhim = a marble-cutter = simply a stone-mason, <a href="#Page_60">60</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Músà (Moses), <a href="#Page_112">112</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mutalammis (“Jarír bin ’Abd al-Masíh”) a poet of “The Ignorance,” <a href="#Page_94">94</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Mutasa’lik” for “Mutasa’lik = like a Sa’lúk” = lean of limb, <a href="#Page_122">122</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Mu’tazid bi ’llah Al-, Caliph, <a href="#Page_124">124</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Muzawwaj = married, <a href="#Page_170">170</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Nabít, son of “Ashur,” <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nádán (<em>Arab.</em>) = the “unknowing” (as op. to Naudán, the equiv. of Pers. “New of knowledge”), <a href="#Page_11">11</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nadan (in Assyrian story) = Nathan, King of the people of Pukudu, <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nádán (<em>Pers.</em>) = fool, <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nadan The Fool, <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Naddábah = public wailing-woman, <a href="#Page_17">17</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Nahs” = something more than ill-omened, something nasty, foul, uncanny, <a href="#Page_71">71</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Náhú (from ✓ “Nauh”) = making ceremonious “Keening” for the dead, <a href="#Page_17">17</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Najas = a pear, <a href="#Page_160">160</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Najmat al-Sabáh = constellation of Morn, <a href="#Page_173">173</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nakáír al- (<em>pl.</em> of Nakír = a dinghy, a dug-out) <em>tr.</em> “canoes,” <a href="#Page_258">258</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nakdí = the actual dowry as opposed to the contingent dowry, <a href="#Page_43">43</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nákús, or the Gong = Bell, <a href="#Page_100">100</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Names for clouds, rain, etc., in <em>Arab.</em> well nigh innumerable, <a href="#Page_241">241</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nátúr Al- = the Keeper, esp. of a vineyard, <a href="#Page_57">57</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Naudán (<em>Arab.</em>) equiv. to the <em>Pers.</em> “New of knowledge” as opp. to “Nádán” the “unknowing,” <a href="#Page_11">11</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Naynawah, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “Fish-town” or “town of Nin” = Ninus the founder, <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Naynawah, in mod. days name of a port on east bank of Tigris, <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Naynawah or “town of Nin” = Ninus, the founder, <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Naysán, the Syro-solar month = April, <a href="#Page_27">27</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Názúk, prob. a corr. of Pers. “Názuk” = adj. = delicate, nice, <a href="#Page_67">67</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nazúr = one who looks intently, for Názir, a looker, <a href="#Page_18">18</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Negemet-il-Souper (Heron) = Najmat al-Sabáh = constellation of Morn, <a href="#Page_173">173</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nisrín, an island, prob. fabulous, where amber abounds, <a href="#Page_12">12</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Nizál = dismounting to fight on foot, <a href="#Page_231">231</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Obedience to children common in Eastern folk-lore, <a href="#Page_90">90</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">’Omán, name of the capital of Eastern Arabia, <a href="#Page_139">139</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ommiades, Cathedral Mosque of, one of the wonders of the Moslem world, <a href="#Page_172">172</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Only son has a voice in the disposal of his sister, <a href="#Page_83">83</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">O rider of the jar, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, a witch, <a href="#Page_76">76</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Original sin, <a href="#Page_247">247</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Osarsiph = Osiris-Sapi (Moses), <a href="#Page_112">112</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Otbah hath a colic,” <a href="#Page_77">77</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Pá-andáz = cloth to tread upon, <a href="#Page_259">259</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Perceval C. de, quoted, <a href="#Page_89">89</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Pharaoh (of Hebrew Scriptures) has become with the Arabs “Fir’aun,” the dynastic name of Egyptian kings, <a href="#Page_12">12</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Pilgrimage quoted, <a href="#Page_9">9</a>, <a href="#Page_83">83</a>, <a href="#Page_99">99</a>, <a href="#Page_104">104</a>, <a href="#Page_105">105</a>, <a href="#Page_131">131</a>, <a href="#Page_174">174</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Porphyry quarries in Middle Egypt, rediscovery of, <a href="#Page_60">60</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Prayer of Moses, the man of God,” <a href="#Page_103">103</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Punishment by flogging, <a href="#Page_9">9</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Puzzling questions and clever replies, a favourite exercise in the East, <a href="#Page_97">97</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">“Quicker to slay than Amrú bin Kulsum” (Proverb), <a href="#Page_94">94</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Rabí’a, <a href="#Page_245">245</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ráhíb = monk or lion (<em>tr.</em> “God-fearing”), <a href="#Page_155">155</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Rahúm” for “Rahím” (Doric form) = compassionate, <a href="#Page_18">18</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Rauzah” in Algiers was a royal park, <a href="#Page_243">243</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Rauz al-Sanájirah” = plain of the Sinjars, <a href="#Page_243">243</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Razah = cedar or fir (old controversy), <a href="#Page_5">5</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Reading placed in more honourable place than writing (“Writing and reading,” as opposed to “Reading and writing”), <a href="#Page_5">5</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Red Sea (Holy Writ does not say that Pharaoh was drowned in), <a href="#Page_99">99</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Retribution confined to this life, and belief that Fate is fruit of man’s actions (Mosaic theory), <a href="#Page_140">140</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Riddle or conundrum, <a href="#Page_97">97</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Riding men as asses, a facetious exaggeration of an African practice, <a href="#Page_240">240</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Roc or vulture, <a href="#Page_23">23</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rod of Moses became a common symbol of dignity, etc., <a href="#Page_157">157</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rods of Moses and Aaron, <a href="#Page_98">98</a>, <a href="#Page_99">99</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Roum, city of (Rúmí), <a href="#Page_89">89</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Rudaynían,” from “Rudaynah,” either a woman or a place, <a href="#Page_230">230</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rukhám = marble or alabaster, here used for building material, <a href="#Page_60">60</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Rúmí (“Roum”), in Marocco and other parts of Moslem world is still syn. with our “European,” <a href="#Page_89">89</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Rushdu ’llah” or “Al-Hudà,” spiritual direction or divine grace received from Allah, <a href="#Page_104">104</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">“Sa’alab” or “Tha’lab” = Fox, <a href="#Page_146">146</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Sádát wa Ashráf” = Sayyids and Sharífs, <a href="#Page_233">233</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">(“Sahha) ’alakah (=a something) fí hazá ’l-Amri” = albeit I will take no part, <a href="#Page_245">245</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Sáhib al-jayyid” (Al-) (<em>Arab.</em>) = excellent companion, <a href="#Page_5">5</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sajálmah-bird, unknown to dictionaries, prob. species of hawk, <a href="#Page_35">35</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Sakalat” (<em>Pers.</em>) or “Saklatún,” whence Mr. Skeat would derive “scarlet,” <a href="#Page_5">5</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sakká (<em>Arab.</em>) = a water carrier, <a href="#Page_46">46</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Sakká Sharbah,” who supplies water to passengers in streets, <a href="#Page_46">46</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Salám” here = Heaven’s blessing, <a href="#Page_97">97</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Salát, sundry technical meanings, <a href="#Page_103">103</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Salát = the formal ceremonious prayer, <a href="#Page_103">103</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Salb” = impalement, everywhere else meaning crucifixion, <a href="#Page_260">260</a>–1.</li>
				<li class="c029">Samaritans, <a href="#Page_160">160</a>–1.</li>
				<li class="c029">Samd = carpets and pots and pans (<em>tr. Vaiselle</em>), <a href="#Page_64">64</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Samhari, <a href="#Page_229">229</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sámiri Al-, Golden Calf of, <a href="#Page_160">160</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sámiri, translated by Christian commentators as “Samaritan,” <a href="#Page_160">160</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Samman” (for “Sammán”) = quails, <a href="#Page_66">66</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Samman” or “Summan” (classically “Salwá”) = quails, <a href="#Page_147">147</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Samson’s Enigma (Judges xiv. 12), <a href="#Page_106">106</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sandarúsah (<em>Arab.</em>) = red juniper gum (from <em>Pers.</em> “Sandar” = amber) <em>tr.</em> “Sandarach,” <a href="#Page_141">141</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sankharíb the Sovran, <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sarhádún = “Sarkhadom” (<em>Gauttier</em>). The great usurper Sargon, <a href="#Page_6">6</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sayyád, <em>lit.</em> = a fisherman, <a href="#Page_161">161</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Scarlet (red, violet, white, green), <a href="#Page_5">5</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Seven handwritings, <a href="#Page_226">226</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shaghaftíní (also “Ashghaftíní”) from Shaghaf = violent love, joy, grief = “Thou hast enamoured me,” <a href="#Page_15">15</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shaghaf = violent love, joy, grief, <a href="#Page_15">15</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shah-Goase (Shah Ghawwás = King Diver), <a href="#Page_233">233</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shakbán = the end of cloth, gown, cloak, etc. (Houdas), <a href="#Page_189">189</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sháked (<em>Heb.</em>) = Almond-tree, <a href="#Page_7">7</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shamámah (or “Chamama,” accord. to Gauttier and Heron), <a href="#Page_68">68</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shám = Syria (and its capital) called Damascus (Cotheal MS.), <a href="#Page_167">167</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Shámat = cheek mole (beauty spot), applied to Damascus (Shám), <a href="#Page_167">167</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Shobási,” for “Sobáshí,” <a href="#Page_191">191</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sibák (<em>Arab.</em>) usually = a leash (for falconry) <em>tr.</em> “silken cord,” <a href="#Page_46">46</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sikálah (<em>Sing.</em>) = scaffolding, <a href="#Page_61">61</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sikbáj, a marinated stew like Zirbájah, <a href="#Page_160">160</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sikbáj (<em>Pers.</em> Sikbá) called “Mother of Hospitality,” being principal dish set before guests, <a href="#Page_159">159</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Símiyá = fascination (a form of magic), <a href="#Page_132">132</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sin akhi-irib = Sini (Lunus, or the moon-god) increaseth brethren (Etymology of “Sankharíb”), <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sinaubar (<em>tr.</em> “pine”) may also mean pistachio-tree, <a href="#Page_163">163</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Snsál” for “Salsál” = <em>lit.</em> chain (<em>tr.</em> “borders”), <a href="#Page_235">235</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Spare not blows to thy child,” a barbarous sentiment of Biblical inspiration, <a href="#Page_9">9</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Spare the rod and spoil the child,” <a href="#Page_9">9</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Steingass Notes, <a href="#Page_5">5</a>, <a href="#Page_57">57</a>, <a href="#Page_67">67</a>, <a href="#Page_73">73</a>, <a href="#Page_122">122</a>, <a href="#Page_125">125</a>, <a href="#Page_138">138</a>, <a href="#Page_147">147</a>, <a href="#Page_245">245</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Striking the nape = “boxing ears” (Moslem equiv.), <a href="#Page_35">35</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sultan, amongst Arabs may denote any dignity from a Shaykh to a Sultan, <a href="#Page_226">226</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Summák = a plant with acid flavour, dried, pounded, and peppered with meat, <a href="#Page_160">160</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Sun fare backwards = “to eclipse the sun,” <a href="#Page_107">107</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Suwaydá al-Kalb (the black one of the heart) = original sin (synonymous with “Habbat al-Kalb” = the grain in the heart), both metaphorically used for “original sin.” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_247">247</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Suwayd” and “Suwaydá,” diminutives of “Aswad” = black. (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_247">247</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Suwaydá, <em>lit.</em> “a small and blackish woman,” <a href="#Page_247">247</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Ta’arkalak, (<em>Arab.</em>) = waylay thee, <a href="#Page_7">7</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tábah = gag, <a href="#Page_184">184</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tabariyyah = Gennesaret (Chinnereth, Cinneroth) where, according to some Moslems, <em>the</em> Solomon was buried, <a href="#Page_101">101</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tabshálím, (a word which appears to be a corruption bearing a resemblance to “Dabshalim,” meaning “a mighty king”), <a href="#Page_23">23</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tá-Há, whose first 14–16 verses are said to have converted the hard-headed Omar, <a href="#Page_157">157</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tajní = <em>lit.</em> thou pluckest (the fruit of good deeds), <a href="#Page_104">104</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Takhtrawán = mule-litter, <a href="#Page_181">181</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Takwà (form gen. used for “Ittikà”) = fearing God, <a href="#Page_96">96</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tá-mera (Coptic) = the Land of the Nile Flood, <a href="#Page_12">12</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Tarajjum,” taking refuge from Satan the Stoned (Rajím), <a href="#Page_190">190</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tarjumán = a dragoman, <a href="#Page_89">89</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tarjumanah (<em>fem.</em> of “Tarjumán” = a dragoman) = <em>lit.</em> an “interpreter” woman, <a href="#Page_89">89</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tatadakhkhal ’alay-h = “sue his protection,” <a href="#Page_134">134</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tays = myriads of, <a href="#Page_187">187</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Thaníyyat al-’Ukáb = the Vulture’s Pass, <a href="#Page_181">181</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“The green stick is of the trees of Paradise,” <a href="#Page_9">9</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“The reed-pen wrote what ’twas bidden write” = “Destiny so willed it,” <a href="#Page_51">51</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“There is no harm to thee, and boon of health befal thee,” auspicious formula, <a href="#Page_174">174</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">The sand appeared in the sunlight like unto ropes (author and <em>Steingass</em> explain) <a href="#Page_32">32</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“This night” for “last night,” <a href="#Page_128">128</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tín (<em>Arab.</em>) = clay, mud (used with Tob forming walls of Egypt and Assyria), <a href="#Page_24">24</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">TMT, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, Tammat = She (the tale) is finished, <a href="#Page_38">38</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tobe = the Anglo-Oriental form of “Thaub” = in Arabia a loose robe like a night-gown, <a href="#Page_139">139</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“To eat skite” = to talk or act foolishly, <a href="#Page_70">70</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Towáb Al- (<em>Arab. pl.</em> of <em>Pers.</em> and <em>Turk.</em> “Top”) = cannon, <a href="#Page_186">186</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tuhà = cooked meat, <a href="#Page_187">187</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Tutmájíyah” for “Tútmáj” = vermicelli, <a href="#Page_160">160</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Tuzáribí may mean “Dost thou play the part of” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_57">57</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Ukiyyah (or Wukiyyah) = ounce = 571·5 to 576 grains, <a href="#Page_163">163</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Voices from the other world, <a href="#Page_227">227</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Wahwah Al- = the hue of metal leaves, <a href="#Page_122">122</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Wa Kita’h hamrah,” <em>tr.</em> “also a bit of cooked meat,” <a href="#Page_125">125</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Wa lá ahad tafawwaha fína” = “nor hath anyone ever spoken,” <a href="#Page_29">29</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Walawá’yh? = wa’l-aw’iyah (<em>pl.</em> of wi’á) = and the vessels ... shimmered like unto silver for their cleanliness. (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_122">122</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wálí, at one time a Civil Governor, and in other ages a Master of Police, <a href="#Page_67">67</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Waliyah” or “Waliyáh” = and why? 59.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Wa’lláhu ’l-Muwaffiku ’l-Mu’ín” = God prospereth and directeth (a formula often prefixed to a book), <a href="#Page_196">196</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Walwalah” or “Wilwál” (an onomatopy), general term for the wail, <a href="#Page_17">17</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Wa yabkí ’alaykum Mabálu-h” = suffer only his crime be upon you (<em>Steingass</em> reads “Wabál” for “Mabál,” and translates, “lest the guilt of it rest upon you,”) <a href="#Page_246">246</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wayha-k (before “Wayla-k”) = “Fie upon thee,” <a href="#Page_20">20</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Weapons and furniture (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, headstalls, hobbles, etc.) for mare saddled and bridled (price for slave), <a href="#Page_92">92</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Week days, <a href="#Page_13">13</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“When Adam dolve and Eve span,” etc., <a href="#Page_102">102</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Will, a mighty motor-power, <a href="#Page_126">126</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Window gardening, an ancient practice in the East, <a href="#Page_172">172</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Writing and reading,” as opposed to our “Reading and writing,” <a href="#Page_5">5</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Wuldán = Ghilmán = the boys of Paradise, <a href="#Page_128">128</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">“Yabahh” = saying “Bah, Bah!” 253.</li>
				<li class="c029">“Yá Bunayyí” = <em>lit.</em> “O my little son,” a term of special fondness (<em>tr.</em> “O dear, my son”), <a href="#Page_7">7</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yákah Thiyábish = his robe-collar rent, <a href="#Page_247">247</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá Kawákí = O thou brawler, <a href="#Page_84">84</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yakhat (prob. cler. error for “Yakhbut,”) <em>lit.</em> = he was panting in a state of unconsciousness, <em>tr.</em> “drowned” in sleep, <a href="#Page_244">244</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá Luss (<em>Arab.</em>) = “O Robber” (=the Gr. <span xml:lang="grc">ληστὴς</span>), <a href="#Page_56">56</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yamaklak, Al- = vivers, provaunt, <a href="#Page_180">180</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yamak (<em>Turk.</em>) = food, a meal, <a href="#Page_180">180</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yapousmek (old ver.) = “Yá Abú Sumayk,” <a href="#Page_16">16</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá Ta’ásat-ná = “O our misery,” <a href="#Page_48">48</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ya’tadir (dots often omitted in MS.) may mean Ya’tazir = find excuse, <a href="#Page_20">20</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ya’tadir (from ✓ ’Adr = heavy rain, boldness) (<em>tr.</em> “fortify himself,”), <a href="#Page_20">20</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá Ta’ís = “O thou miserable,” <a href="#Page_48">48</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yatbashsh (for “yanbashsha”) = a smiling face, <a href="#Page_138">138</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">—— may also stand for Yabtashsh, with transposition of the “t” of the 8th form (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_138">138</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Ya’tazir = find excuse, <a href="#Page_20">20</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yaum al-Khamís (<em>Arab.</em>) = fifth day, <a href="#Page_13">13</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yá zayn = oh, the beautiful beast, <a href="#Page_149">149</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Yulakkimu (<em>Arab.</em>) from “Lukmah” = a mouthful, <a href="#Page_75">75</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Zábit = A Prefect of Police, <a href="#Page_154">154</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zábit (from the ✓ “Zabt” = keeping in subjection, holding tight) <em>tr.</em> “Holdfast,” <a href="#Page_154">154</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zabtiyah = a constable, <a href="#Page_154">154</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zafar = victory (clerical error for Zafar = plaited hair), <a href="#Page_104">104</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zahr, Al- = duty, <a href="#Page_162">162</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zalamah (<em>Arab.</em>) = tyrants, <a href="#Page_73">73</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Záraba (<em>verb</em>) 3rd form followed by acc. = “to join one in partnership” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_57">57</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zarábíl (com. cor. of Zarábin = slaves’ shoes, slippers), <a href="#Page_48">48</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zarbúl tákí (<em>Arab.</em>), the latter meaning “high-heeled,” <a href="#Page_53">53</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zawádah (gen. “Azwád” or “Azwidah”) = provisions, viaticum, <a href="#Page_181">181</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zayjah (from (<em>Pers.</em>) “Záycheh”) = <em>lit.</em> a horoscope (<em>tr.</em> “lot”), <a href="#Page_235">235</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zifr = horny matter which, according to Moslem tradition, covered our first parents, <a href="#Page_104">104</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zimmat = obligation, protection, clientship (<em>tr.</em> “loyalty”), <a href="#Page_245">245</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Zindík = Atheist, Agnostic, <a href="#Page_158">158</a>.</li>
				<li class="c029">Znnákt-ha, <em>tr.</em> “(striketh) her sting” (?) <a href="#Page_35">35</a>.</li>
			</ul>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
