<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="volume-16" id="chapter-16-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Appendix I.<br /> <span class="large"><em>INDEX I.</em><br /> <em>INDEX TO THE TALES AND PROPER NAMES</em></span></h2>

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div><em>N.B.—The Roman Numerals denote the volume, the Arabic the page.</em></div>
  </div>
</div>

<ul class="index">
  <li class="c029">Abbaside, Ja’afar bin Yahya and Abd Al-Malik bin Salih the, i. 159.</li>
  <li class="c029">Abd Al-Malik bin Salih the Abbaside, Ja’afar bin Yahya and, i. 159.</li>
  <li class="c029">Abdullah bin Nafí’, Tale of Harun Al-Rashid and, ii. 67.</li>
  <li class="c029">Abu Niyyatayn, History of Abu Niyyah and, iv. 334.</li>
  <li class="c029">Abu Niyyah and Abu Niyyatayn, History of, iv. 334.</li>
  <li class="c029">Abu Sabir, Story of, i. 81.</li>
  <li class="c029">Abu Tammam, Story of Aylan Shah and, i. 112.</li>
  <li class="c029">Advantages of Patience, Of the, i. 81.</li>
  <li class="c029">Adventure of the Fruit Seller and the Concubine, iv. 256.</li>
  <li class="c029">Adventures of Khudadad and his brothers, iii. 269.</li>
  <li class="c029">Adventures of Prince Ahmad and the Fairy Peri-Banu, iii. 419.</li>
  <li class="c029">Al-’Abbás, Tale of King Ins bin Kays and his daughter with the Son of King ii. 191.</li>
  <li class="c029">Alaeddin; or the Wonderful Lamp, iii. 51.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. (English Translation of Galland), iii. 195.</li>
  <li class="c029">Al-Bundukani, or the Caliph Harun Al-Rashid and the daughter of King Kisra, vi. 39.</li>
  <li class="c029">Al-Hajjaj and the Three Young Men, i. 47.</li>
  <li class="c029">Al-Hajjaj bin Yusuf and the Young Sayyid, History of, v. 37.</li>
  <li class="c029">Al-Hayfa and Yusuf, The Loves of, v. 121.</li>
  <li class="c029">Ali Baba, and the Forty Thieves, Story of, iii. 369.</li>
  <li class="c029">Ali Khwajah and the Merchant of Baghdad, Story of, iii. 405.</li>
  <li class="c029">Allah, Of the Speedy relief of, i. 151.</li>
  <li class="c029">Allah, Of Trust in, i. 102.</li>
  <li class="c029">Al-Maamun and Zubaydah, i. 175.</li>
  <li class="c029">Al-Maamun, The Concubine of, ii. 281.</li>
  <li class="c029">Al-Malik Al-Zahir Rukn Al-Din Bibars al-Bundukdari and the Sixteen Captains of Police, ii. 3.</li>
  <li class="c029">Al-Nu’uman and the Arab of the Banu Tay, i. 179.</li>
  <li class="c029">Al-Rahwan, King Shah Bakht and his Wazir, i. 191.</li>
  <li class="c029">Al-Rashid and the Barmecides, i. 165.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Ibn Al-Sammak and, i. 171.</li>
  <li class="c029">Appointed Term, which, if it be Advanced may not be Deferred, and if it be Deferred, may not be Advanced, Of the, i. 129.</li>
  <li class="c029">Arab of the Banu Tay, Al-Nu’uman and the, i. 179.</li>
  <li class="c029">Ass, Tale of the Sharpers with the Shroff and the, i. 298.</li>
  <li class="c029">Attaf, The Tale of, vi. 165.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. (by Alex. J. Cotheal) vi. 197.</li>
  <li class="c029">Aylan Shah and Abu Tammam, Story of, i. 112.</li>
  <li class="c005">Baba Abdullah, Story of the Blind Man, iii. 311.</li>
  <li class="c029">Babe, History of the Kazi who bare a, iv. 167.</li>
  <li class="c029">Bakhtzaman, Story of King, i. 102.</li>
  <li class="c029">Banu Tay, Al-Nu’uman and the Arab of the, i. 179.</li>
  <li class="c029">Barber and the Captain, The Cairenne Youth, the, v. 241.</li>
  <li class="c029">Barber’s Boy and the Greedy Sultan, Story of the Darwaysh and the, v. 105.</li>
  <li class="c029">Barmecides, Al-Rashid and the, i. 165.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Harun Al-Rashid and the Woman of the, i. 51.</li>
  <li class="c029">Bassorah, The Loves of the Lovers of, v. 65.</li>
  <li class="c029">Beautiful Daughter to the Poor Old Man, Tale of the Richard who married the, i. 218.</li>
  <li class="c029">Bhang-Eater and his Wife, History of the, iv. 202.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Tale of the Kazi and the, iv. 187.</li>
  <li class="c029">Bihkard, Story of King, i. 107.</li>
  <li class="c029">Blind man, Baba Abdullah, Story of the, iii. 311.</li>
  <li class="c029">Broke-Back Schoolmaster, Story of the, iv. 95.</li>
  <li class="c005">Cadette, Tale of the Two Sisters who envied their, iii. 491.</li>
  <li class="c029">Cairenne Youth, the Barber and the Captain, The, v. 241.</li>
  <li class="c029">Cairo (The good wife of) and her four gallants, v. 251.</li>
  <li class="c029">Caliph Harun Al-Rashid and the daughter of King Kisra, The History of Al-Bundukani or the, vi. 39.</li>
  <li class="c029">Caliph Omar Bin Abd Al-Aziz and the Poets, The, i. 39.</li>
  <li class="c029">Caliph’s Night Adventure, History of the, iii. 307.</li>
  <li class="c029">Caliph, The Concubine and the, ii. 275.</li>
  <li class="c029">Captain, The Cairenne Youth, the Barber and the, v. 241.</li>
  <li class="c029">Captain, The Tailor and the Lady and the, v. 261.</li>
  <li class="c029">Cheat and the Merchants, Tale of the, i. 302.</li>
  <li class="c029">China, The three Princes of, v. 211.</li>
  <li class="c029">Clemency, Of, i. 107.</li>
  <li class="c029">Clever Thief, A merry jest of a, ii. 56.</li>
  <li class="c029">Cock and the Fox, The pleasant history of the, vi. 143.</li>
  <li class="c029">Cœlebs the droll and his wife and her four Lovers, v. 295.</li>
  <li class="c029">Compeer, Tale of the Two Sharpers who each cozened his, i. 288.</li>
  <li class="c029">Concubine, Adventure of the Fruit Seller and the, iv. 256.</li>
  <li class="c029">Concubine and the Caliph, The, ii. 275.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. of Al-Maamun, The, ii. 281.</li>
  <li class="c029">Constable’s History, First, ii. 6.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Second, ii. 16.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Third, ii. 19.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Fourth, ii. 23.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Fifth, ii. 25.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Sixth, ii. 27.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Seventh, ii. 30.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Eighth, ii. 34.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do.  Ninth, ii. 44.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Tenth, ii. 47.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Eleventh, ii. 49.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Twelfth, ii. 52.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Thirteenth, ii. 53.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Fourteenth, ii. 54.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Fifteenth, ii. 59.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Sixteenth, ii. 63.</li>
  <li class="c029">Cook, Story of the Larrikin and the, i. 4.</li>
  <li class="c029">Coyntes, The Lady with the two, v. 279.</li>
  <li class="c029">Crone and the Draper’s Wife, Story of the, i. 309.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. and the King, Tale of the Merchant, the, i. 235.</li>
  <li class="c029">Cunning she thief, The gate keeper of Cairo and the, v. 307.</li>
  <li class="c005">Dadbin and his Wazirs, Story of King, i. 94.</li>
  <li class="c029">Darwaysh and the Barber’s Boy and the Greedy Sultan, Story of, v. 105.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. The Sultan who fared forth in the habit of a, iv. 35.</li>
  <li class="c029">Daryabar, History of the Princess of, iii. 281.</li>
  <li class="c029">Daughter of King Kisra, The History of Al-Bundukani, or the Caliph Harun Al-Rashid and the, vi. 39.</li>
  <li class="c029">David and Solomon, Story of, i. 244.</li>
  <li class="c029">Destiny or that which is written on the Forehead, i. 120.</li>
  <li class="c029">Dethroned Ruler, whose reign and wealth were restored to him, Tale of the, i. 253.</li>
  <li class="c029">Devotee accused of Lewdness, Tale of the, i. 270.</li>
  <li class="c029">Disciple’s Story, The, i. 251.</li>
  <li class="c029">Druggist, Tale of the Singer and the, i. 203.</li>
  <li class="c029">Drummer Abu Kasim became a Kazi, How, iv. 210.</li>
  <li class="c029">Duenna and the King’s Son, The Linguist-Dame, the, vi. 87.</li>
  <li class="c005">Eighth Constable’s History, ii. 34.</li>
  <li class="c029">Eleventh Constable’s History, ii. 49.</li>
  <li class="c029">Enchanting Bird, Story of the King of Al-Yaman and his Three sons, and the, v. 258.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do., Tale of the Sultan and his Three Sons and the, iv. 244.</li>
  <li class="c029">Ends of Affairs, Of Looking to the, i. 73.</li>
  <li class="c029">Envy and Malice, Of, i. 111.</li>
  <li class="c005">Fairy Peri Banu, Adventures of Prince Ahmad and the, iii. 419.</li>
  <li class="c029">Falcon and the Locust, Story of the, i. 305.</li>
  <li class="c029">Fellah and his Wicked Wife, The, v. 345.</li>
  <li class="c029">Fifteenth Constable’s History, ii. 59.</li>
  <li class="c029">Fifth Constable’s History, ii. 25.</li>
  <li class="c029">First Constable’s History, ii. 6.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Larrikin, History of the, iv. 281.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Lunatic, Story of the, iv. 49.</li>
  <li class="c029">Firuz and his Wife, i. 185.</li>
  <li class="c029">Fisherman and his Son, Tale of the, iv. 314.</li>
  <li class="c029">Forehead, Of Destiny or that which is Written on the, i. 120.</li>
  <li class="c029">Forty Thieves, Story of Ali Baba and the, iii. 369.</li>
  <li class="c029">Fourteenth Constable’s History, ii. 54.</li>
  <li class="c029">Fourth Constable’s History, ii. 23.</li>
  <li class="c029">Fowl with the Fowler, History of what befel the, vi. 151.</li>
  <li class="c029">Fox, The Pleasant History of the Cock and the, vi. 143.</li>
  <li class="c029">Fruit-seller and the Concubine, Adventure of the, iv. 256.</li>
  <li class="c029">Fruit-seller’s Tale, The, iv. 244.</li>
  <li class="c029">Fuller and his Wife and the Trooper, Tale of the, i. 231.</li>
  <li class="c005">Gallants, The Goodwife of Cairo and her Four, v. 251.</li>
  <li class="c029">Gatekeeper of Cairo and the Cunning She-thief, The, v. 307.</li>
  <li class="c029">Girl, Tale of the Hireling and the, i. 279.</li>
  <li class="c029">Good and Evil Actions, Of the Issues of, i. 93.</li>
  <li class="c029">Goodwife of Cairo and her Four Gallants, The, v. 251.</li>
  <li class="c029">Greedy Sultan, Story of the Darwaysh and the Barber’s Boy and the, v. 105.</li>
  <li class="c005">Hajjaj (Al-) and the Three young Men, i. 47.</li>
  <li class="c029">Harun Al-Rashid and Abdullah bin Nafí, Tale of, ii. 67.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. and the Woman of the Barmecides, i. 51.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. and the Youth Manjab, Night Adventure of, v. 61.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Tale of the Damsel Tohfat al-Kulub and the Caliph, ii. 70.</li>
  <li class="c029">Haykar the Sage, The Say of, vi. 1.</li>
  <li class="c029">History of King Azadbakht and his Son, The Ten Wazirs; or the, i. 55.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. of what befel the Fowl with the Fowler, vi. 151.</li>
  <li class="c029">Hireling and the Girl, Tale of the, i. 279.</li>
  <li class="c029">How Allah gave him relief, Story of the Prisoner and, i. 151.</li>
  <li class="c029">How Drummer Abu Kasim became a Kazi, iv. 210.</li>
  <li class="c029">Husband, Tale of the Simpleton, v. 116.</li>
  <li class="c005">Ibn al-Sammak and Al-Rashid, i. 171.</li>
  <li class="c029">Ibrahim and his Son, Story of, i. 121.</li>
  <li class="c029">Ill Effects of Impatience, Of the, i. 89.</li>
  <li class="c029">Impatience, Of the Ill Effects of, i. 89.</li>
  <li class="c029">Ins bin Kays (King) and his Daughter with the Son of King Al-’Abbás, Tale of, ii. 191.</li>
  <li class="c029">Isa, Tale of the Three Men and our Lord, i. 250.</li>
  <li class="c029">Issues of Good and Evil Actions, Of the, i. 93.</li>
  <li class="c005">Ja’afar bin Yahya and Abd Al-Malik bin Salih the Abbaside, i. 159.</li>
  <li class="c005">Kazi and the Bhang-Eater, Tale of the, iv. 187.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. and the Slipper, Story of the, iv. 212.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do., How Drummer Abu Kasim became a, iv. 210.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. schooled by his Wife, The, v. 361.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. who bare a babe, History of the, iv. 167.</li>
  <li class="c029">Khalbas and his Wife and the Learned Man, Tale of the, i. 267.</li>
  <li class="c029">Khudadad and his Brothers, Adventures of, iii. 269.</li>
  <li class="c029">Khwajah Hasan al-Habbal, History of, iii. 341.</li>
  <li class="c029">King and his Chamberlain’s Wife, Tale of the, i. 308.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Azadbakht and his Son. The Ten Wazirs; or the History of, i. 55.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Bakhtzaman, Story of, i. 102.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Bihkard, Story of, i. 107.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Dadbin and his Wazirs, Story of, i. 94.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Ibrahim and his Son, Story of, i. 121.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. of Al-Yaman and his Three Sons and the Enchanting Bird, Story of the iv. 258.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. of Hind and his Wazir, Tale of, i. 352.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Shah Bakht and his Wazir Al-Rahwan, i. 191.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Sulayman Shah and his Niece, Story of, i. 131.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Tale of himself told by the, v. 463.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Tale of the Merchant, the Crone and the, i. 235.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. who kenned the quintessence of things, Tale of the, i. 212.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. who lost Kingdom and Wife and Wealth and Allah restored them to him, Tale of the, i. 319.</li>
  <li class="c029">King’s Son of Sind and the Lady Fatimah, The History of, v. 1.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. The Linguist-Dame, the Duenna and the, vi. 87.</li>
  <li class="c029">Kurd Sharper, Tale of Mahmud the Persian and the, iv. 242.</li>
  <li class="c005">Lady and the Captain, The Tailor and the, v. 261.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Dunat al-Ghawwas, History of Prince Habib and what befel him with the, vi. 223.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Fatimah, The History of the King’s Son of Sind and the, v. 1.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. with the two Coyntes, The, v. 279.</li>
  <li class="c029">Larrikin and the Cook, Story of the, i. 4.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. concerning himself, Tale of the Third, vi. 329.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. History of the First, iv. 281.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. History of the Second, iv. 290.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. History of the Third, iv. 294.</li>
  <li class="c029">Leach (Tale of the Weaver who became a), by order of his wife, i. 282.</li>
  <li class="c029">Learned Man, Tale of Khalbas and his Wife and the, i. 267.</li>
  <li class="c029">Lewdness, Tale of the Devotee accused of, i. 270.</li>
  <li class="c029">Limping Schoolmaster, Story of the, iv. 101.</li>
  <li class="c029">Linguist-Dame, the Duenna, and the King’s Son, The, vi. 87.</li>
  <li class="c029">Locust, Story of the Falcon and the, i. 305.</li>
  <li class="c029">Looking to the Ends of Affairs, Of, i. 73.</li>
  <li class="c029">Lovers, Cœlebs the Droll and his wife and her four, v. 295.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. of Bassorah, The Loves of the, v. 65.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. of Syria, History of the, v. 19.</li>
  <li class="c029">Loves of Al-Hayfa and Yusuf, The, v. 121.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. of the Lovers of Bassorah, The, v. 65.</li>
  <li class="c029">Luck, Story of the Merchant who lost his, i. 65.</li>
  <li class="c029">Lunatic, Story of the First, iv. 49.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do., Do. Second, iv. 67.</li>
  <li class="c005">Mahmud the Persian and the Kurd Sharper, Tale of, iv. 242.</li>
  <li class="c029">Man of Khorassan, his Son and his Tutor, Tale of the, i. 194.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. whose Caution slew him, Tale of the, i. 258.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. who was Lavish of his House, and his Provision for one whom he knew not, i. 259.</li>
  <li class="c029">Malice, Of Envy and, i. 111.</li>
  <li class="c029">Melancholist and the Sharper, Tale of the, i. 264.</li>
  <li class="c029">Merchant and his Sons, Tale of the, i. 73.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. of Baghdad, Story of Ali Khirajah and the, iii. 405.</li>
  <li class="c029">Merchant’s daughter and the Prince of Al-Irak, The, v. 371.</li>
  <li class="c029">Merchants, Tale of the Cheat and the, i. 302.</li>
  <li class="c029">Merchant, the Crone and the King, Tale of the, i. 235.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. who lost his luck, Story of the, i. 65.</li>
  <li class="c029">Merry Jest of a Clever Thief, A, ii. 56.</li>
  <li class="c029">Mistress and his Wife, Mohammed the Shalabi and his, v. 333.</li>
  <li class="c029">Mohammed, Story of a Sultan of Al-Hind and his Son, iv. 297.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Sultan of Cairo, History of, iv. 37.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. the Shalabi and his Mistress and his Wife, v. 333.</li>
  <li class="c029">Mohsin and Musa, Tale of, v. 319.</li>
  <li class="c029">Musa, Tale of Mohsin and, v. 319.</li>
  <li class="c005">Niece, Story of King Sulayman Shah and his, i. 131.</li>
  <li class="c029">Night Adventure of Sultan Mohammed of Cairo with the Three foolish schoolmasters, The, iv. 90.</li>
  <li class="c029">Night Adventure of Harun Al-Rashid and the Youth Manjab, v. 61.</li>
  <li class="c029">Ninth Constable’s History, ii. 44.</li>
  <li class="c029">Nur al-Din Ali of Damascus and the damsel Sitt al-Milah, ii. 151.</li>
  <li class="c005">Omar Bin Abd Al-Aziz and the Poets, The Caliph, i. 39.</li>
  <li class="c005">Patience, Of the advantages of, i. 81.</li>
  <li class="c029">Persistent Ill Fortune, Of the Uselessness of Endeavour against the, i. 63.</li>
  <li class="c029">Picture, Tale of the Prince who fell in love with the, i. 226.</li>
  <li class="c029">Pleasant History of the Cock and the Fox, The, vi. 143.</li>
  <li class="c029">Poets, The Caliph Omar Bin Abd Al-Aziz and the, i. 39.</li>
  <li class="c029">Poor man who brought to him Fruit, Tale of the Sultan and the, iv. 242.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. old man, Tale of the Richard who married his beautiful Daughter to the, i. 218.</li>
  <li class="c029">Prince Ahmad and the Fairy Peri-Banu, Adventures of, iii. 419.</li>
  <li class="c029">Prince Bihzad, Story of, i. 89.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Habib and what befel him with the Lady Dunat al-Ghawwas, History of, vi. 223.</li>
  <li class="c029">Prince of Al-Irak, The Merchant’s Daughter and the, v. 371.</li>
  <li class="c029">Princess of Daryabar, History of, iii. 281.</li>
  <li class="c029">Prince who fell in love with the Picture, Tale of the, i. 226.</li>
  <li class="c029">Prisoner and how Allah gave him relief, Story of, i. 151.</li>
  <li class="c005">Quintessence of things, Tale of the King who kenned the, i. 212.</li>
  <li class="c005">Richard, Tale of the, who married his beautiful daughter to the Poor Old Man, i. 218.</li>
  <li class="c029">Righteous Wazir wrongfully gaoled, The, v. 229.</li>
  <li class="c029">Robber and the Woman, Tale of the, i. 246.</li>
  <li class="c005">Sage and his Three Sons, Tale of the, i. 222.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. the Scholar, Story of the, iv. 74.</li>
  <li class="c029">Salim the Youth of Khorasan, and Salma his Sister, Tale of, i. 332.</li>
  <li class="c029">Salma, his Sister, Tale of Salim the Youth of Khorasan and, i. 332.</li>
  <li class="c029">Say of Haykar the Sage, The, vi. 1.</li>
  <li class="c029">Scholar, Story of the Sage and the, iv. 74.</li>
  <li class="c029">Schoolmaster, Story of the Broke-Back, iv. 95.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Story of the Limping, iv. 101.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Story of the Split-mouthed, iv. 97.</li>
  <li class="c029">Second Constable’s History, ii. 16.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Larrikin, History of the, iv. 290.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Lunatic, Story of the, iv. 67.</li>
  <li class="c029">Seventh Constable’s History, ii. 30.</li>
  <li class="c029">Shah Bakht and his Wazir Al-Rahwan, King, i. 191.</li>
  <li class="c029">Sharpers with the Shroff and the Ass, Tale of the, i. 298.</li>
  <li class="c029">Sharper, Tale of the Melancholist and the, i. 264.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Tale of the old, ii. 57.</li>
  <li class="c029">Shroff and the Ass, Tale of the Sharpers with the, i. 298.</li>
  <li class="c029">Sidi Nu’uman, History of, iii. 325.</li>
  <li class="c029">Singer and the Druggist, Tale of the, i. 203.</li>
  <li class="c029">Simpleton Husband, Tale of the, i. 239.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Do. v. 116.</li>
  <li class="c029">Sitt al-Milah, Nur al-Din Ali of Damascus and the Damsel, ii. 151.</li>
  <li class="c029">Sixteen Captains of Police, Al-Malik Al-Zahir Rukn Al-Din Bibars Al-Bundukdari and the, ii. 3.</li>
  <li class="c029">Sixteenth Constable’s History, ii. 63.</li>
  <li class="c029">Sixth Constable’s History, ii. 27.</li>
  <li class="c029">Sleeper and the Waker, The, i. 1.</li>
  <li class="c029">Slipper, Story of the Kazi and the, iv. 212.</li>
  <li class="c029">Solomon, Story of David and, i. 244.</li>
  <li class="c029">Sons, Tale of the Merchant and his, i. 73.</li>
  <li class="c029">Speedy relief of Allah, Of the, i. 151.</li>
  <li class="c029">Split Mouth Schoolmaster, Story of the, iv. 97.</li>
  <li class="c029">Sulayman Shah and his Niece, Story of King, i. 131.</li>
  <li class="c029">Sultanah, Story of three Sisters and their Mother the, iv. 109.</li>
  <li class="c029">Sultan and his Three Sons and the Enchanting Bird, Tale of the, iv. 244.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. and the Poor Man who brought to him Fruit, Tale of the, iv. 242.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Mohammed of Cairo with the Three Foolish Schoolmasters, The Night Adventure of, iv. 90.</li>
  <li class="c029">Sultan of Al-Hind and his Son Mohammed, Story of the, iv. 297.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. of Al-Yaman and his Three Sons, Story of, iv. 1.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. who fared forth in the habit of a Darwaysh, The, iv. 35.</li>
  <li class="c029">Syria, History of the Lovers of, v. 19.</li>
  <li class="c029">Syrian and the Three Women of Cairo, The, v. 271.</li>
  <li class="c005">Tailor and the Lady and the Captain, The, v. 261.</li>
  <li class="c029">Tale of Himself told by the King, v. 463.</li>
  <li class="c029">Tenth Constable’s History, ii. 47.</li>
  <li class="c029">Ten Wazirs; or, the History of King Azadbakht and his Son, The, i. 55.</li>
  <li class="c029">Thief’s Tale, The, ii. 42.</li>
  <li class="c029">Third Constable’s History, ii. 19.</li>
  <li class="c029">Third Larrikin concerning himself, Tale of, iv. 329.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. History of the, iv. 294.</li>
  <li class="c029">Thirteenth Constable’s History, ii. 53.</li>
  <li class="c029">Three Foolish Schoolmasters, The Night Adventure of Sultan Mohammed of Cairo with the, iv. 90.</li>
  <li class="c029">Three men and our Lord Isa, Tale of the, i. 250.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Princes of China, The, v. 211.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Sharpers, Story of the, iv. 17.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Sisters and their Mother the Sultanah, Story of the, iv. 109.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Sons, Tale of the Sage and his, i. 222.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Women of Cairo, The Syrian and the, v. 271.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Young Men, Al-Hajjaj and the, i. 47.</li>
  <li class="c029">Tither, Tale of the Unjust King and the, i. 242.</li>
  <li class="c029">Tohfat al-Kulub and the Caliph Harun Al-Rashid, Tale of the Damsel, ii. 70.</li>
  <li class="c029">Trooper, Tale of the Fuller and his wife and the, i. 231.</li>
  <li class="c029">Trust in Allah, Of, i. 102.</li>
  <li class="c029">Tutor, Tale of the Man of Khorassan, his Son and his, i. 194.</li>
  <li class="c029">Twelfth Constable’s History, ii. 52.</li>
  <li class="c029">Two Kings and the Wazir’s daughters, Tale of the, ii. 263.</li>
  <li class="c029">Two Lack-Tacts of Cairo and Damascus, Story of the, v. 453.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Sharpers who each cozened his Compeer, Tale of the, i. 288.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Sisters who envied their Cadette, Tale of the, iii. 491.</li>
  <li class="c005">Ugly man and his beautiful Wife, Tale of the, i. 315.</li>
  <li class="c029">Unjust King and the Tither, Tale of the, i. 242.</li>
  <li class="c029">Uselessness of Endeavour against the Persistent Ill Fortune, Of the, i. 63.</li>
  <li class="c005">Virtue, The whorish wife who vaunted her, v. 287.</li>
  <li class="c005">Waker, The Sleeper and the, i. 1.</li>
  <li class="c029">Warlock and the Young Cook of Baghdad, Tale of the, vi. 119.</li>
  <li class="c029">Wazir Al-Rahwan, King Shah Bakht and his, i. 191.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Tale of the King of Hind and his, i. 352.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. (The Righteous) wrongfully gaoled, v. 229.</li>
  <li class="c029">Wazir’s Daughters, Tale of the Two Kings and the, ii. 263.</li>
  <li class="c029">Wazirs; or the History of King Azadbakht and his Son, The Ten, i. 55.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Story of King Dadbin and his, i. 94.</li>
  <li class="c029">Weaver who became a Leach by order of his wife, Tale of the, i. 282.</li>
  <li class="c029">Whorish wife who vaunted her virtue, The, v. 287.</li>
  <li class="c029">Wicked wife, The Fellah and his, v. 345.</li>
  <li class="c029">Wife, Firuz and his, i. 185.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. History of the Bhang Eater and his, iv. 202.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Story of the Crone and the Draper’s, i. 309.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Tale of the King and his Chamberlain’s, i. 308.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. do. Ugly man and his beautiful, i. 315.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. do. Weaver who became a Leach by order of his, i. 282.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. The Kazi schooled by his, v. 361.</li>
  <li class="c029">Wives, Story of the Youth who would futter his father’s, v. 439.</li>
  <li class="c029">Woman of the Barmecides, Harun Al-Rashid and the, i. 51.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Tale of the Robber and the, i. 246.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. who humoured her lover at her husband’s expense, The, v. 355.</li>
  <li class="c029">Women’s Wiles, ii. 137.</li>
  <li class="c029">Wonderful Lamp, Alaeddin; or the, iii. 51.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. do. (English Translation of Galland), iii. 195.</li>
  <li class="c005">Young Cook of Baghdad, Tale of the Warlock and the, vi. 119.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Sayyid, History of Al-Hajjaj bin Yusuf and the, v. 37.</li>
  <li class="c029">Youth Manjab, Night Adventure of Harun Al-Rashid and the, v. 61.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. who would futter his father’s wives, Story of the, v. 439.</li>
  <li class="c029">Yusuf, The Loves of Al-Hayfa and, v. 121.</li>
  <li class="c005">Zayn al-Asnam, Tale of, iii. 3.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. (Turkish version by E. J. W. Gibb), iii. 41.</li>
  <li class="c029">Zubaydah, Al-Maamun and, i. 175.</li>
</ul>

<div>

  <h3 class="c015"><em>VARIANTS AND ANALOGUES BY W. A. CLOUSTON.</em></h3>
</div>

<ul class="index c003">
  <li class="c029">Aladdin; or the Wonderful Lamp, iii. 564.</li>
  <li class="c029">Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves, iii. 590.</li>
  <li class="c029">Ali Khwajah and the Merchant of Baghdad, iii. 596.</li>
  <li class="c029">Al-Malik Al-Zahir and the Sixteen Captains of Police, ii. 369.</li>
  <li class="c005">Blind Man, Baba Abdullah, The Story of the, iii. 582.</li>
  <li class="c005">Damsel Tohfat al-Kulub, The, ii. 371.</li>
  <li class="c029">Devout woman accused of Lewdness, The, ii. 340.</li>
  <li class="c005">Fifteenth Constable’s Story, The, ii. 369.</li>
  <li class="c029">Firuz and his Wife, ii. 301.</li>
  <li class="c029">Fuller, his Wife and the Trooper, The, ii. 329.</li>
  <li class="c005">Khudadad and his Brothers, iii. 576.</li>
  <li class="c029">Khwajah Hasan al-Habbal, History of, iii. 587.</li>
  <li class="c029">King Aylan Shah and Abu Tammam, ii. 297.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Dadbin and his Wazirs, ii. 296.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Ins bin Kays and his Daughter, ii. 377.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Shah Bakht and his Wazir Al-Rahwan, ii. 302.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. Sulayman Shah and his Niece, ii. 298.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. who kenned the Quintessence of things, The, ii. 320.</li>
  <li class="c029">Do. who lost Kingdom, Wife and Wealth, The, ii. 343.</li>
  <li class="c005">Melancholist and the Sharper, The, ii. 333.</li>
  <li class="c005">Ninth Constable’s Story, The, ii. 369.</li>
  <li class="c029">Nur al-Din and the Damsel Sitt al-Milah, ii. 277.</li>
  <li class="c005">On the Art of Enlarging Pearls, ii. 303.</li>
  <li class="c005">Prince Ahmad and the Peri Banu, iii. 600.</li>
  <li class="c029">Prince who fell in love with the Picture, The, ii. 328.</li>
  <li class="c005">Sidi Nu’uman, History of, iii. 585.</li>
  <li class="c029">Simpleton Husband, The, ii. 332.</li>
  <li class="c029">Singer and the Druggist, The, ii. 305.</li>
  <li class="c029">Sleeper and the Waker, ii. 291.</li>
  <li class="c005">Ten Wazirs, or the History of King Azadbakht and his son, ii. 295.</li>
  <li class="c029">Thief’s Tale, The, ii. 369.</li>
  <li class="c029">Three men and our Lord Isa, The, ii. 332.</li>
  <li class="c029">Two Sisters who envied their Cadette, The, iii. 617.</li>
  <li class="c005">Weaver who became a leach by order of his wife, The, ii. 341.</li>
  <li class="c029">Women’s Wiles, ii. 372.</li>
  <li class="c005">Zayn al-Asnam, The tale of, iii. 553.</li>
</ul>

<div>

  <h3 class="c015"><em>ADDITIONAL NOTES BY W. A. CLOUSTON.</em></h3>
</div>

<ul class="index c003">
  <li class="c029">Aladdin, or the Wonderful Lamp, iii. 650.</li>
  <li class="c029">Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves, iii. 650.</li>
  <li class="c005">Firuz and his Wife, ii. 378.</li>
  <li class="c029">Fuller, his wife and the Trooper, The, ii, 379.</li>
  <li class="c005">Prince Ahmad, The Tale of, iii. 652.</li>
  <li class="c005">Singer and the Druggist, The, ii. 378.</li>
  <li class="c005">Zayn al-Asnam, The Tale of, iii. 649.</li>
</ul>

<h3 class="c015"><em>BY W. F. KIRBY.</em></h3>

<ul class="index c003">
  <li class="c029">Additional Notes to some of Tales in vol. iv.; v. 505.</li>
  <li class="c029">Additional Notes to some of Tales in vol. v.;  v. 513.</li>
  <li class="c029">Additional Notes to some of Tales in vol. vi.; vi. 351.</li>
  <li class="c029">Additional Bibliographical Notes to the Tales in the Supplemental Nights, vi. 356.</li>
</ul>

<div class="chapter">
  
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
