<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-13-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Prince Ahmad and the Fairy Peri-Banu<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6544" id="noteref-6544" epub:type="noteref">6544</a></h2>


<p>In days of yore and times long gone before there was a Sultan
of India who begat three sons; the eldest hight Prince Husayn,
the second Prince Ali, and the youngest Prince Ahmad; moreover
he had a niece, named Princess Nur al-Nihár,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6545" id="noteref-6545" epub:type="noteref">6545</a> the daughter of his
cadet brother who, dying early, left his only child under her uncle’s
charge. The King busied himself with abundant diligence about
her instruction and took all care that she should be taught to read
and write, sew and embroider, sing and deftly touch all instruments
of mirth and merriment. This Princess also in beauty and loveliness
and in wit and wisdom far excelled all the maidens of her own
age in every land. She was brought up with the Princes her
cousins in all joyance; and they ate together and played together
and slept together; and the king had determined in his mind that
when she reached marriageable age he would give her in wedlock
to some one of the neighbouring royalties; but, when she came to
years of discretion, her uncle perceived that the three Princes his
sons were all three deep in love of her, and each desired in his
heart to woo and to win and to wed her. Wherefore was the King
sore troubled in mind and said to himself, “An I give the Lady
Nur al-Nihár in wedlock to any one of her cousins, the other
twain will be dissatisfied and murmur against my decision; withal
my soul cannot endure to see them grieved and disappointed.
And should I marry her to some stranger the three Princes my
sons will be sore distressed and saddened in soul; nay, who
knoweth that they may not slay themselves or go forth and betake
them to some far and foreign land? The matter is a troublous and a
perilous; so it behoveth me their sire to take action on such wise that
if one of them espouse her, the other two be not displeased thereat.”
Long time the Sultan revolved the matter in his mind; and at
length he devised a device; and, sending for the three Princes,
addressed them saying, “O my sons, ye are in my opinion of equal
merit one with other; nor can I give preference to any of you and
marry him to the Princess Nur al-Nihar; nor yet am I empowered
to wed her with all three. But I have thought of one plan
whereby she shall be wife to one of you, and yet shall not cause aught
of irk or envy to his brethren; so may your mutual love and
affection remain unabated, and one shall never be jealous of the
other’s happiness. Brief, my device is this:—Go ye and travel to
distant countries, each one separating himself from the others; and
do ye bring me back the thing most wondrous and marvellous of all
sights ye may see upon your wayfarings; and he who shall return
with the rarest of curiosities shall be husband to the Princess Nur
al-Nihar. Consent ye now to this proposal; and whatso of money
ye require for travel and for the purchase of objects seld-seen and
singular, take ye from the royal treasury as much as ye desire.”
The three Princes, who were ever submissive to their sire, consented
with one voice to this proposal, and each was satisfied and confident
that he would bring the King the most extraordinary of
gifts and thereby win the Princess to wife. So the Sultan bade
give to each what moneys he wanted without stint or account, and
counselled them to make ready for the journey without stay or
delay and depart their home in the Peace of Allah.——And as
the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-fourth Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Then said she:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that the three
princely brothers forthright made them ready for journey and
voyage. So they donned disguise, preferring the dress of wandering
merchants; and, buying such things as they needed and taking
with them each his suite they mounted steeds of purest blood and
rode forth in a body from the palace. For several stages they
travelled the same road until, reaching a place where it branched
off in three different ways, they alighted at a Khan and ate the
evening meal. Then they made compact and covenant, that
whereas they had thus far travelled together they should at break
of day take separate roads and each wend his own way and all
seek different and distant regions, agreeing to travel for the space
of one year only, after which, should they be in the land of the
living, all three would rendezvous at that same caravanserai and
return in company to the King their sire. Furthermore, they
determined that the first who came back to the Khan should await
the arrival of the next, and that two of them should tarry there in
expectancy of the third. Then, all this matter duly settled, they
retired to rest, and when the morning morrowed they fell on one
another’s necks and bade farewell; and, lastly, mounting their horses,
they rode forth each in his own direction. Now Prince Husayn,
the eldest, had oft heard recount the wonders of the land Bishangarh<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6546" id="noteref-6546" epub:type="noteref">6546</a>,
and for a long while had wished to visit it; so he took the
road which led thither, and, joining himself to a caravan journeying
that way, accompanied it by land and by water and traversed many
regions, desert wilds and stony wolds, dense jungles and fertile
tracts, with fields and hamlets and gardens and townships. After
three months spent in wayfare at length he made Bishangarh, a
region over-reigned by manifold rulers, so great was its extent and
so far reaching was its power. He put up at a Khan built specially
for merchants who came from the farthest lands, and from the folk
who dwelt therein he heard tell that the city contained a large
central market<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6547" id="noteref-6547" epub:type="noteref">6547</a> wherein men bought and sold all manner of rarities
and wondrous things. Accordingly, next day Prince Husayn
repaired to the Bazar and on sighting it he stood amazed at the
prospect of its length and width. It was divided into many streets,
all vaulted over but lit up by skylights; and the shops on either
side were substantially builded, all after one pattern and nearly of
the same size, while each was fronted by an awning which kept off
the glare and made a grateful shade. Within these shops were
ranged and ordered various kinds of wares; there were bales of
“woven air”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6548" id="noteref-6548" epub:type="noteref">6548</a> and linens of finest tissue, plain-white or dyed or
adorned with life-like patterns wherefrom beasts and trees and
blooms stood out so distinctly that one might believe them to be
very ferals, bosquets and gardens. There were moreover silken
goods, brocaded stuffs, and finest satins from Persia and Egypt of
endless profusion; in the China warehouses stood glass vessels of
all kinds, and here and there were stores wherein tapestries and
thousands of foot-carpets lay for sale. So Prince Husayn walked
on from shop to shop and marvelled much to see such wondrous
things whereof he had never even dreamt: and he came at length
to the Goldsmiths’ Lane and espied gems and jewels and golden
and silvern vessels studded with diamonds and rubies, emeralds,
pearls and other precious stones, all so lustrous and dazzling bright
that the stores were lit up with their singular brilliancy. Hereat
he said to himself, “If in one street only there be such wealth and
jewels so rare, Allah Almighty and none save He knoweth what
may be the riches in all this city.” He was not less astonished to
behold the Brahmins, how their woman-kind for excess of opulence
bedecked themselves with the finest gems and were ornamented
with the richest gear from front to foot: their very slave-boys and
handmaids wore golden necklaces and bracelets and bangles studded
with precious stones. Along the length of one market-street were
ranged hosts of flower-sellers; for all the folk, both high and low,
wore wreaths and garlands: some carried nosegays in hand, other
some bound fillets round their heads, while not a few had ropes and
festoons surrounding and hanging from their necks. The whole
place seemed one huge parterre of bloomery; even traders set
bouquets in every shop and stall, and the scented air was heavy
with perfume. Strolling to and fro Prince Husayn was presently
tired and would fain have sat him down somewhere to rest awhile,
when one of the merchants, noting his look of weariness, with
kindly courtesy prayed him be seated in his store. After saluting
him with the salam the stranger sat down; and anon he saw a
broker come that way, offering for sale a carpet some four yards
square, and crying, “This be for sale; who giveth me its worth;
to wit, thirty thousand gold pieces?”——And as the morn began
to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-fifth Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Then said she:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
Prince marvelled with excessive marvel at the price, and, beckoning
the dealer, examined his wares right well; then said he, “A
carpet such as this is selleth for a few silverlings. What special
virtue hath it that thou demand therefor the sum of thirty
thousand gold coins?” The broker, believing Husayn to be a
merchant man lately arrived at Bishangarh, answered him saying,
“O my lord, thinkest thou I price this carpet at too high
a value? My master hath bidden me not to sell it for less than
forty thousand Ashrafis.” Quoth the Prince, “It surely doth
possess some wondrous virtue, otherwise wouldst thou not demand
so prodigious a sum;” and quoth the broker, “’Tis true, O my
lord, its properties are singular and marvellous. Whoever sitteth
on this carpet and willeth in thought to be taken up and set down
upon other site will, in the twinkling of an eye, be borne thither,
be that place nearhand or distant many a day’s journey and
difficult to reach.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6549" id="noteref-6549" epub:type="noteref">6549</a> The Prince hearing these words said to himself,
“Naught so wonder-rare as this rug can I carry back to the
Sultan my sire to my gift, or any that afford him higher satisfaction
and delight. Almighty Allah be praised, the aim of my
wayfare is attained and hereby, Inshallah! I shall win to my
wish. This, if anything, will be to him a joy for ever.” Wherefore
the Prince, with intent to buy the Flying Carpet, turned to
the broker and said, “If indeed it have properties such as thou
describest, verily the price thou askest therefor is not over much,
and I am ready to pay thee the sum required.” The other
rejoined, “An thou doubt my words I pray thee put them to the
test and by such proof remove thy suspicions. Sit now upon this
square of tapestry, and at thy mere wish and will it shall transport
us to the caravanserai wherein thou abidest: on this wise shalt
thou be certified of my words being sooth, and when assured of
their truth thou mayest count out to me, there and then, but not
before, the value of my wares.” Accordingly, the man spread out
the carpet upon the ground behind his shop and seated the Prince
thereupon, he sitting by his side. Then, at the mere will<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6550" id="noteref-6550" epub:type="noteref">6550</a> and
wish of Prince Husayn, the twain were at once transported as
though borne by the throne of Solomon to the Khan. So the
eldest of the brothers joyed with exceeding joy to think that he
had won so rare a thing, whose like could nowhere be found in
the lands nor amongst the Kings; and his heart and soul were
gladdened for that he had come to Bishangarh and hit upon
such a prodigy. Accordingly he counted out the forty thousand
Ashrafis as payment for the carpet, and gave, moreover, another
twenty thousand by way of sweetmeat to the broker. Furthermore,
he ceased not saying to himself that the King on seeing it
would forthright wed him to the Princess Nur al-Nihar; for it
were clear impossible that either of his brothers, e’en though they
searched the whole world over and over, could find a rarity to compare
with this. He longed to take seat upon the carpet that very
instant and fly to his own country, or, at least, to await his brothers
at the caravanserai where they had parted under promise and
covenant, pledged and concluded, to meet again at the year’s end.
But presently he bethought him that the delay would be long and
longsome, and much he feared lest he be tempted to take some
rash step; wherefore he resolved upon sojourning in the country
whose King and subjects he had ardently desired to behold for many
a day, and determined that he would pass the time in sight-seeing
and in pleasuring over the lands adjoining. So Prince Husayn
tarried in Bishangarh some months. Now the King of that
country was wont to hold a high court once every week for
hearing disputes and adjudging causes which concerned foreign
merchants; and thus the Prince ofttimes saw the King, but to none
would he tell a word of his adventure. However, inasmuch as he
was comely of countenance, graceful of gait, and courteous of accost,
stout hearted and strong, wise and ware and witty, he was held by
the folk in higher honour than the Sultan; not to speak of the
traders his fellows; and in due time he became a favourite at
court and learned of the ruler himself all matters concerning his
kingdom and his grandeur and greatness. The Prince also
visited the most famous Pagodas<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6551" id="noteref-6551" epub:type="noteref">6551</a> of that country. The first he
saw was wrought in brass and orichalch of most exquisite workmanship:
its inner cell measured three yards square and contained
amiddlemost a golden image in size and stature like unto a
man of wondrous beauty; and so cunning was the workmanship
that the face seemed to fix its eyes, two immense rubies of enormous
value, upon all beholders no matter where they stood.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6552" id="noteref-6552" epub:type="noteref">6552</a> He also
saw another idol-temple, not less strange and rare than this,
builded in a village on a plain surface of some half acre long and
broad, wherein bloomed lovely rose-trees and jasmine and herb-basil
and many other sweet-scented plants, whose perfume made
the air rich with fragrance. Around its court ran a wall three
feet high, so that no animal might stray therein; and in the
centre was a terrace well-nigh the height of a man, all made of
white marble and wavy alabaster, each and every slab being
dressed so deftly and joined with such nice joinery that the whole
pavement albeit covering so great a space, seemed to the sight but
a single stone. In the centre of the terrace stood the domed fane
towering some fifty cubits high and conspicuous for many miles
around: its length was thirty cubits and its breadth twenty, and
the red marbles of the revetment were clean polished as a mirror,
so that every image was reflected in it to the life. The dome
was exquisitely carved and sumptuously ornamented without;
and within were ranged in due rank and sequence rows and rows
of idols. To this, the Holy of Holies, from morn till eve
thousands of Brahmins, men and women, came flocking for daily
worship. They had sports and diversions as well as rites and
ceremonies: some feasted and others danced, some sang, others
played on instruments of mirth and merriment, while here and
there were plays and revels and innocent merry-makings. And
hither at every season flocked from distant lands hosts of pilgrims
seeking to fulfil their vows and to perform their orisons; all
bringing gifts of gold and silver coin and presents rare and costly
which they offered to the gods in presence of the royal officers.——And
as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace
till</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-sixth Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Then said she:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that Prince
Husayn also saw a fête held once a year within the city of Bishangarh,
and the Ryots all, both great and small, gathered together
and circumambulated the Pagodas; chiefly circuiting one which
in size and grandeur surpassed all others. Great and learned
Pandits versed in the Shástras<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6553" id="noteref-6553" epub:type="noteref">6553</a> made journeys of four or five
months and greeted one another at that festival; thither too the
folk from all parts of India pilgrimaged in such crowds that
Prince Husayn was astounded at the sight; and, by reason of the
multitudes that thronged around the temples, he could not see
the mode in which the gods were worshipped. On one side of the
adjacent plain which stretched far and wide, stood a new-made
scaffolding of ample size and great magnificence, nine storeys
high, and the lower part supported by forty pillars; and here one
day in every week the King assembled his Wazirs for the purpose
of meting out justice to all strangers in the land. The palace
within was richly adorned and furnished with costly furniture:
without, upon the wall-faces were limned homely landscapes and
scenes of foreign parts and notably all manner beasts and birds
and insects even gnats and flies, portrayed with such skill of brain
and cunning of hand that they seemed real and alive and the
country-folk and villagers seeing from afar paintings of lions and
tigers and similar ravenous beasts, were filled with awe and dismay.
On the three other sides of the scaffolding were pavilions, also of
wood, built for use of the commons, illuminated and decorated
inside and outside like the first, and wroughten so cunningly that
men could turn them round, with all the people in them, and moving
them about transfer them to whatsoever quarter they willed. On
such wise they shifted these huge buildings by aid of machinery;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6554" id="noteref-6554" epub:type="noteref">6554</a>
and the folk inside could look upon a succession of sports and
games. Moreover, on each side of the square elephants were
ranged in ranks, the number amounting to well-nigh one thousand,
their trunks and ears and hinder parts being painted with cinnabar
and adorned with various lively figures; their housings were of
gold brocade and their howdahs purfled with silver, carrying
minstrels who performed on various instruments, whilst buffoons
delighted the crowd with their jokes and mimes played their most
diverting parts. Of all the sports, however, which the Prince
beheld, the elephant-show amused him most and filled him with
the greatest admiration. One huge beast, which could be wheeled
about where the keepers ever listed, for that his feet rested upon a
post which travelled on casters, held in his trunk a flageolet
whereon he played so sweetly well that all the people were fain to
cry Bravo! There was another but a smaller animal which stood
upon one end of a beam laid crosswise upon, and attached with
hinges to, a wooden block eight cubits high, and on the further
end was placed an iron weight as heavy as the elephant, who
would press down for some time upon the beam until the end
touched the ground, and then the weight would raise him up
again.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6555" id="noteref-6555" epub:type="noteref">6555</a> Thus the beam swung like a see-saw aloft and adown;
and, as it moved, the elephant swayed to and fro and kept time
with the bands of music, loudly trumpeting the while. The
people moreover could wheel about this elephant from place to
place as he stood balanced on the beam; and such exhibitions of
learned elephants were mostly made in presence of the King.
Prince Husayn spent well-nigh a year in sight-seeing amongst
the fairs and festivals of Bishangarh; and, when the period of the
fraternal compact drew near, he spread his carpet upon the courtground
behind the Khan wherein he lodged, and sitting thereon,
together with the suite and the steeds and all he had brought with
him, mentally wished that he might be transported to the caravanserai
where the three brothers had agreed to meet. No sooner
had he formed the thought than straightway, in the twinkling of
an eye, the carpet rose high in air and sped through space and
carried them to the appointed stead where, still garbed as a merchant
he remained in expectation of his brothers’ coming. Hearken
now, O auspicious King, to what befel Prince Ali, the second
brother of Prince Husayn. On the third day after he had parted
from the two others, he also joined a caravan and journeyed
towards Persia; then, after a march of four months arriving at
Shiraz, the capital of Iran-land, he alighted at a Khan, he and his
fellow-travellers with whom he had made a manner of friendship;
and, passing as a jeweller, there took up his abode with them.
Next day the traders fared forth to buy wares and to sell their
goods; but Prince Ali, who had brought with him naught of
vendible, and only the things he needed, presently doffed his
travelling dress, and in company with a comrade of the caravan
entered the chief Bazar, known as the Bazistán,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6556" id="noteref-6556" epub:type="noteref">6556</a> or cloth-market.
Ali strolled about the place, which was built of brick and where
all the shops had arched roofs resting on handsome columns; and
he admired greatly to behold the splendid store-houses exposing
for sale all manner goods of countless value. He wondered much
what wealth was in the town if a single market-street contained
riches such as these. And as the brokers went about crying
their goods for sale, he saw one of them hending in hand an
ivory tube in length about a cubit, which he was offering for sale
at the price of thirty thousand Ashrafis. Hearing such demand
Prince Ali thought to himself, “Assuredly this fellow is a fool who
asketh such a price for so paltry a thing.”——And as the morn
began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till</p>

<div></div>
<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-seventh Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Then said she:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that Prince
Ali presently asked one of the shopkeepers with whom he had
made acquaintance, saying, “O my friend, is this man a maniac that
he asketh a sum of thirty thousand Ashrafis for this little pipe of
ivory? Surely none save an idiot would give him such a price and
waste upon it such a mint of money.” Said the shopman, “O my
lord, this broker is wiser and warier than all the others of his
calling, and by means of him I have sold goods worth thousands
of sequins. Until yesterday he was in his sound senses; but I
cannot say what state is his to-day and whether or no he have
lost his wits; but this wot I well, that if he ask thirty thousand for
yon ivory tube, ’twill be worth that same or even more. Howbeit
we shall see with our own eyes. Sit thee here and rest within the
shop until he pass this way.” So Prince Ali took where he was
bidden and presently the broker was seen coming up the street.
Then the shopman calling to him said, “O man, rare merit hath
yon little pipe; for all the folk are astounded to hear thee ask so
high a price therefor; nay more, this friend of mine thinketh that
thou art crazy.” The broker, a man of sense, was on no wise
chafed at these words but answered with gentle speech, “O my
lord, I doubt not but that thou must deem me a madman to ask
so high a price, and set so great a value upon an article so mean;
but when I shall have made known to thee its properties and
virtues, thou wilt most readily consent to take it at that valuation.
Not thou alone but all men who have heard me cry my cry laugh
and name me ninny.” So saying, the broker showed the Spying
Tube to Prince Ali and handing it to him said, “Examine well this
ivory, the properties of which I will explain to thee. Thou seest
that it is furnished with a piece of glass at either end;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6557" id="noteref-6557" epub:type="noteref">6557</a> and, shouldst
thou apply one extremity thereof to thine eye, thou shalt see what
thing soe’er thou listest and it shall appear close by thy side though
parted from thee by many an hundred of miles.” Replied the Prince
“This passeth all conception, nor can I believe it to be veridical until
I shall have tested it and I become satisfied that ’tis even as thou
sayest.” Hereupon the broker placed the little tube in Prince Ali’s
hand, and showing him the way to handle it said, “Whatso thou
mayest wish to descry will be shown to thee by looking through
this ivory.” Prince Ali silently wished to sight his sire, and when
he placed the pipe close to his eye forthwith he saw him hale and
hearty, seated on his throne and dispensing justice to the people
of his dominion. Then the youth longed with great longing to look
upon his lady-love the Princess Nur al-Nihar; and straightway he
saw her also sitting upon her bed, sound and sane, talking and
laughing, whilst a host of handmaids stood around awaiting her
commands. The Prince was astonished exceedingly to behold this
strange and wondrous spectacle, and said to himself, “An I should
wander the whole world over for ten years or more and search in
its every corner and cranny, I shall never find aught so rare and
precious as this tube of ivory.” Then quoth he to the broker, “The
virtues of thy pipe I find are indeed those thou hast described, and
right willingly I give thee to its price the thirty thousand Ashrafis.”
Replied the salesman, “O my lord, my master hath sworn an oath
that he will not part with it for less than forty thousand gold
pieces.” Hereupon the Prince, understanding that the broker was
a just man and a true, weighed out to him the forty thousand
sequins and became master of the Spying Tube, enraptured with
the thought that assuredly it would satisfy his sire and obtain for
him the hand of Princess Nur al-Nihar. So with mind at ease
Ali journeyed through Shiraz and over sundry parts of Persia;
and in fine, when the year was well-nigh spent he joined a caravan
and, travelling back to India, arrived safe and sound at the appointed
caravanserai whither Prince Husayn had foregone him.
There the twain tarried awaiting the third brother’s safe return.
Such, O King Shahryar, is the story of the two brothers; and now
I beseech thee incline thine ear and hearken to what befel the
youngest, to wit Prince Ahmad; for indeed his adventure is yet
more peregrine and seld-seen of all. When he had parted from
his brothers, he took the road leading to Samarkand; and, arriving
there after long travel, he also like his brothers alighted at a Khan.
Next day he fared forth to see the market-square, which folk call
the Bazistan, and he found it fairly laid out, the shops wroughten
with cunning workmanship and filled with rare stuffs and precious
goods and costly merchandise. Now as he wandered to and fro he
came across a broker who was hawking a Magical Apple and crying
aloud, “Who will buy this fruit, the price whereof be thirty-five
thousand gold pieces?” Quoth Prince Ahmad to the man,
“Prithee let me see the fruit thou holdest in hand, and explain to
me what hidden virtue it possesseth that thou art asking for it so
high a value.” Quoth the other, smiling and handing to him the
apple, “Marvel not at this, O good my lord: in sooth I am certified
that when I shall have explained its properties and thou shalt see
how it advantageth all mankind, thou wilt not deem my demand
exorbitant; nay, rather thou wilt gladly give a treasure-house of
gold so thou may possess it.”——And as the morn began to
dawn Shahrazad held her peace till</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-eighth Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Then said she:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
broker said moreover to Prince Ahmad, “Now hearken to me, O
my lord, and I will tell thee what of virtue lieth in this artificial
apple. If anyone be sick of a sickness however sore, nay more
if he be ill nigh unto death, and perchance he smell this pome, he
will forthwith recover and become well and whole of whatsoever
disease he had, plague or pleurisy, fever or other malignant distemper,
as though he never had been attacked; and his strength
will return to him forthright, and after smelling this fruit he will be
free from all ailment and malady so long as life shall remain to
him.” Quoth Prince Ahmad, “How shall I be assured that what
thou speakest is truth? If the matter be even as thou sayest, then
verily I will give thee right gladly the sum thou demandest.”
Quoth the broker, “O my lord, all men who dwell in the parts
about Samarkand know full well how there once lived in this city
a sage of wondrous skill who, after many years of toil and travail,
wrought this apple by mixing medicines from herbs and minerals
countless in number. All his good, which was great, he expended
upon it, and when he had perfected it he made whole thousands of
sick folk whom he directed only to smell the fruit. But, alas! his
life presently came to an end and death overtook him suddenly ere
he could save himself by the marvellous scent; and, as he had won
no wealth and left only a bereaved wife and a large family of young
children and dependants manifold, his widow had no help but provide
for them a maintenance by parting with this prodigy.” While
the salesman was telling his tale to the Prince a crowd of citizens
gathered around them and one amongst the folk, who was well
known to the broker, came forward and said, “A friend of mine
lieth at home sick to the death: the doctors and surgeons all
despair of his life; so I beseech thee let him smell this fruit that
he may live.” Hearing these words, Prince Ahmad turned to
the salesman and said, “O my friend, if this sick man of whom
thou hearest can recover strength by smelling the apple, then will
I straightway buy it of thee at a valuation of forty thousand
Ashrafis.” The man had permission to sell it for a sum of thirty-five
thousand; so he was satisfied to receive five thousand by
way of brokerage, and he rejoined, “’Tis well, O my lord;
now mayest thou test the virtues of this apple and be persuaded
in thy mind: hundreds of ailing folk have I made whole
by means of it.” Accordingly the Prince accompanied the people
to the sick man’s house and found him lying on his bed with the
breath in his nostrils; but, as soon as the dying man smelt the
fruit, at once recovering strength he rose in perfect health, sane and
sound. Hereupon Ahmad bought the Magical Apple of the dealer
and counted out to him the forty thousand Ashrafis. Presently, having
gained the object of his travels, he resolved to join some caravan
marching Indiawards and return to his father’s home; but meanwhile
he resolved to solace himself with the sights and marvels of
Samarkand. His especial joy was to gaze upon the glorious plain
hight Soghd,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6558" id="noteref-6558" epub:type="noteref">6558</a> one of the wonders of this world: the land on all sides
was a delight to the sight, emerald-green and bright, with crystal
rills like the plains of Paradise; the gardens bore all manner flowers
and fruits and the cities and palaces gladdened the stranger’s gaze.
After some days Prince Ahmad joined a caravan of merchants wending
Indiawards; and, when his long and longsome travel was ended,
he at last reached the caravanserai where his two brothers, Husayn
and Ali, impatiently awaited his arrival. The three rejoiced with
exceeding joy to meet once more and fell on one another’s necks;
thanking Allah who had brought them back safe and sound, hale
and hearty, after such prolonged and longsome absence. Then
Prince Husayn, being the eldest, turned to them and said, “Now
it behoveth us each to recount what hath betided him and announce
what rare thing he hath brought back and what be the
virtues thereof; and I, being the first-born, will be the foremost to
tell my adventures. I bring with me from Bishangarh, a carpet,
mean to look at, but such are its properties that should any sit
thereon and wish in mind to visit country or city, he will at once
be carried thither in ease and safety although it be distant months,
nay years of journey. I have paid forty thousand gold pieces to
its price; and, after seeing all the wonders of Bishangarh-land, I
took seat upon my purchase and willed myself at this spot.
Straightway I found myself here as I wished and have tarried in
this caravanserai three months awaiting your arrival. The flying
carpet is with me; so let him who listeth make trial of it.” When
the senior Prince had made an end of telling his tale, Prince Ali
spake next and said, “O my brother, this carpet which thou hast
brought is marvel-rare and hath most wondrous gifts; nor according
to thy statement hath any in all the world seen aught to compare
with it.” Then bringing forth the Spying Tube, he pursued,
“Look ye here, I too have bought for forty thousand Ashrafis
somewhat whose merits I will now show forth to you.”——And as
the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Forty-ninth Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Then said she:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that Prince
Ali enlarged upon the virtues of his purchase and said:—“Ye see
this ivory pipe? By means of it man may descry objects hidden
from his sight and distant from him many a mile. ’Tis truly a
most wondrous matter and right worthy your inspection, and you
two may try it an ye will. Place but an eye close to the smaller
glass and form a wish in mind to see what thing soe’er your soul
desireth; and, whether it be near hand or distant many hundreds of
miles, this ivory will make the object look clear and close to you.”
At these words Prince Husayn took the pipe from Prince Ali and,
applying his eye to one end as he had been directed, then wished
in his heart to behold the Princess Nur al-Nihar;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6559" id="noteref-6559" epub:type="noteref">6559</a> and the two
brothers watched him to learn what he would say. Suddenly they
saw his face change colour and wither as a wilted flower, while in
his agitation and distress a flood of tears gushed from his eyes;
and, ere his brothers recovered from their amazement and could
enquire the cause of such strangeness, he cried aloud, “Alas!
and well-away. We have endured toil and travail, and we have
travelled so far and wide hoping to wed the Princess Nur al-Nihar.
But ’tis all in vain: I saw her lying on her bed death-sick and
like to breathe her last and around her stood her women all
weeping and wailing in the sorest of sorrow. O my brothers, an
ye would see her once again for the last time, take ye one final
look through the glass ere she be no more.” Hereat Prince Ali
seized the Spying Tube and peered through it and found the condition
of the Princess even as his brother Husayn had described;
so he presently passed it over to Prince Ahmad, who also looked
and was certified that the Lady Nur al-Nihar was about to give up
the ghost. So he said to his elder brothers, “We three are alike
love-distraught for the Princess and the dearest wish of each one
is to win her. Her life is on the ebb, still I can save her and
make her whole if we hasten to her without stay or delay.” So
saying he pulled from his pocket the Magical Apple and showed
it to them crying, “This thing is not less in value than either the
Flying Carpet or the Spying Tube. In Samarkand I bought it for
forty thousand gold pieces and here is the best opportunity to try
its virtues. The folk told me that if a sick man hold it to his
nose, although on the point of death, he will wax at once well and
hale again: I have myself tested it, and now ye shall see for
yourselves its marvel-cure when I shall apply it to the case of
Nur al-Nihar. Only, let us seek her presence ere she die.”
Quoth Prince Husayn, “This were an easy matter: my carpet
shall carry us in the twinkling of an eye straight to the bedside of
our beloved. Do ye without hesitation sit down with me thereupon,
for there is room sufficient to accommodate us three; we
shall instantly be carried thither and our servants can follow us.”
Accordingly, the three Princes disposed themselves upon the
Flying Carpet and each willed in his mind to reach the bedside
of Nur al-Nihar, when instantly they found themselves within her
apartment. The handmaids and eunuchs in waiting were terrified
at the sight and marvelled how these stranger men could have
entered the chamber; and, as the Castratos were fain fall upon them,
brand in hand, they recognised the Princes and drew back still in
wonderment at their intrusion. Then the brothers rose forthright
from the Flying Carpet and Prince Ahmad came forwards and
put the Magical Apple to the nostrils of the lady, who lay stretched
on the couch in unconscious state; and as the scent reached her
brain the sickness left her and the cure was complete. She
opened wide her eyes and sitting erect upon her bed looked all
around and chiefly at the Princes as they stood before her; for she
felt that she had waxed hale and hearty and as though she awoke
after the sweetest of slumber. Presently she rose from her couch
and bade her tire-women dress her the while they related to her
the sudden coming of the three Princes, her uncle’s sons, and how
Prince Ahmad had made her smell something whereby she had
recovered of her illness. And after she had made the Ablution of
Health she joyed with exceeding joy to see the Princes and
returned thanks to them, but chiefly to Prince Ahmad in that he
had restored her to health and life.——And as the morn began
to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Fiftieth Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Then she said:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
brothers also were gladdened with exceeding gladness to see the
Princess Nur al-Nihar recover so suddenly from mortal malady;
and, presently taking leave of her, they fared to greet their father.
Meanwhile the Eunuchs had reported the whole matter to the
Sultan, and when the Princes came before him he rose and
embraced them tenderly and kissed them on their foreheads, filled
with satisfaction to see them again and to hear from them the
welfare of the Princess, who was dear to him as she had been
his daughter. Then the three brothers produced each one the
wondrous thing he had brought from his wayfare; and Prince
Husayn first showed the Flying Carpet which in the twinkling of
an eye had transported them home from far distant exile and said,
“For outward show this carpet hath no merit, but inasmuch as it
possesseth such wondrous virtue, methinks ’tis impossible to find
in all the world aught that can compare to it for rarity.” Next,
Prince Ali presented to the King his Spying Tube and said, “The
mirror of Jamshíd<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6560" id="noteref-6560" epub:type="noteref">6560</a> is as vain and naught beside this pipe, by
means whereof all things from East to West and from North to
South are made clearly visible to the ken of man.” Last of all,
Prince Ahmad produced the Magical Apple which wondrously
saved the dear life of Nur al-Nihar and said, “By means of this
fruit all maladies and grievous distempers are at once made whole.”
Thus each presented his rarity to the Sultan, saying, “O our lord,
deign examine well these gifts we have brought and do thou
pronounce which of them all is most excellent and admirable; so,
according to thy promise, he amongst us on whom thy choice may
fall shall marry the Princess Nur al-Nihar.” When the King had
patiently listened to their several claims and had understood how
each gift took part in restoring health to his niece, for a while he
dove deep in the sea of thought and then answered, “Should I
award the palm of merit to Prince Ahmad, whose Magical Apple
cured the Princess, then should I deal unfairly by the other two.
Albeit his rarity restored her to life and health from mortal illness,
yet say me how had he known of her condition save by the virtue of
Prince Ali’s Spying Tube? In like manner, but for the Flying Carpet
of Prince Husayn, which brought you three hither in a moment’s
space, the Magical Apple would have been of no avail. Wherefore
’tis my rede all three had like part and can claim equal merit
in healing her; for it were impossible to have made her whole if
any one thing of the three were wanting; furthermore all three
objects are wondrous and marvellous without one surpassing
other, nor can I, with aught of reason, assign preference or precedence
to any. My promise was to marry the Lady Nur al-Nihar
to him who should produce the rarest of rarities, but although
strange ’tis not less true that all are alike in the one essential
condition. The difficulty still remaineth and the question is yet
unsolved, whilst I fain would have the matter settled ere the close
of day, and without prejudice to any. So needs must I fix upon
some plan whereby I may be able to adjudge one of you to be the
winner, and bestow upon him the hand of Princess Nur al-Nihar,
according to my plighted word; and thus absolve myself from all
responsibility. Now I have resolved upon this course of action;
to wit, that ye should mount each one his own steed and all of
you be provided with bow and arrows; then do ye ride forth to
the Maydán—the hippodrome—whither I and my Ministers of State
and Grandees of the kingdom and Lords of the land will follow you.
There in my presence ye shall each, turn by turn, shoot a shaft
with all your might and main; and he amongst you whose arrow
shall fly the farthest will be adjudged by me worthiest to win the
Princess Nur al-Nihar to wife.” Accordingly the three Princes,
who could not gainsay the decision of their sire nor question its
wisdom and justice, backed their coursers, and each taking his bow
and arrows made straight for the place appointed. The King
also, when he had stored the presents in the royal treasury, arrived
there with his Wazirs and the dignitaries of his realm; and as soon
as all was ready, the eldest son and heir, Prince Husayn, essayed his
strength and skill and shot a shaft far along the level plain.
After him Prince Ali hent his bow in hand and, discharging an
arrow in like direction, overshot the first; and lastly came Prince
Ahmad’s turn. He too aimed at the same end, but such was the
decree of Destiny, that although the knights and courtiers urged
on their horses to note where his shaft might strike ground, withal
they saw no trace thereof and none of them knew if it had sunk
into the bowels of earth or had flown up to the confines of the
sky. Some, indeed, there were who with evil mind held that
Prince Ahmad had not shot any bolt, and that his arrow had
never left his bow. So at last the King bade no more search be
made for it and declared himself in favour of Prince Ali and
adjudged that he should wed the Princess Nur al-Nihar, forasmuch
as his arrow had outsped that of Prince Husayn. Accordingly,
in due course the marriage rites and ceremonies were performed
after the law and ritual of the land with exceeding pomp and
grandeur. But Prince Husayn would not be present at the bride-feast
by reason of his disappointment and jealousy, for he had
loved the Lady Nur al-Nihar with a love far exceeding that of
either of his brothers; and he doffed his princely dress and
donning the garb of a Fakir fared forth to live a hermit’s life.
Prince Ahmad also burned with envy and refused to join the
wedding-feast: he did not, however, like Prince Husayn, retire to
a hermitage, but he spent all his days in searching for his shaft to
find where it had fallen. Now it so fortuned that one morning he
went again, alone as was his wont, in quest thereof, and starting
from the stead whence they had shot their shafts reached the
place where the arrows of Princes Husayn and Ali had been
found. Then going straight forwards he cast his glances on every
side over hill and dale to his right and to his left——And as the
morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-first Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Then said she:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that Prince
Ahmad went searching for his shaft over hill and dale when,
after covering some three parasangs, suddenly he espied it
lying flat upon a rock.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6561" id="noteref-6561" epub:type="noteref">6561</a> Hereat he marvelled greatly, wondering
how the arrow had flown so far, but even more so
when he went up to it and saw that it had not stuck in the
ground but appeared to have rebounded and to have fallen flat
upon a slab of stone. Quoth he to himself, “There must assuredly
be some mystery in this matter: else how could anyone shoot a
shaft to such a distance and find it fallen after so strange a
fashion.” Then, threading his way amongst the pointed crags and
huge boulders, he presently came to a hollow in the ground which
ended in a subterraneous passage, and after pacing a few paces he
espied an iron door. He pushed this open with all ease, for that
it had no bolt, and entering, arrow in hand, he came upon an easy
slope by which he descended. But whereas he feared to find all
pitch-dark, he discovered at some distance a spacious square, a
widening of the cave, which was lighted on every side with lamps
and candelabra. Then advancing some fifty cubits or more his
glance fell upon a vast and handsome palace, and presently there
issued from within to the portico a lovely maiden lovesome and
lovable, a fairy-form robed in princely robes and adorned from
front to foot with the costliest of jewels. She walked with slow
and stately gait, withal graceful and blandishing, whilst around
her ranged her attendants like the stars about a moon of the
fourteenth night. Seeing this vision of beauty, Prince Ahmad
hastened to salute her with the salam and she returned it; then
coming forwards greeted him graciously and said in sweetest
accents, “Well come and welcome, O Prince Ahmad: I am pleased
to have sight of thee. How fareth it with thy Highness and why
hast thou tarried so long away from me?” The King’s son
marvelled greatly to hear her name him by his name; for that he
knew not who she was, as they had never seen each other aforetime—how
then came she to have learnt his title and condition?
Then kissing ground before her he said, “O my lady, I owe thee
much of thanks and gratitude for that thou art pleased to welcome
me with words of cheer in this strange place where I, alone and a
stranger, durst enter with exceeding hesitation and trepidation.
But it perplexeth me sorely to think how thou camest to learn the
name of thy slave.” Quoth she with a smile, “O my lord, come
hither and let us sit at ease within yon belvedere; and there I will
give an answer to thine asking.” So they went thither, Prince
Ahmad following her footsteps; and on reaching it he was filled
with wonder to see its vaulted roof of exquisite workmanship and
adorned with gold and lapis lazuli<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6562" id="noteref-6562" epub:type="noteref">6562</a> and paintings and ornaments,
whose like was nowhere to be found in the world. The lady
seeing his astonishment said to the Prince, “This mansion is
nothing beside all my others which now, of my free will, I have
made thine own; and when thou seest them thou shalt have just
cause for wonderment.” Then that sylph-like being took seat
upon a raised daïs and with abundant show of affection seated
Prince Ahmad by her side. Presently quoth she, “Albeit thou
know me not, I know thee well, as thou shalt see with surprise
when I shall tell thee all my tale. But first it behoveth me
disclose to thee who I am. In Holy Writ belike thou hast read
that this world is the dwelling-place not only of men, but also
of a race hight the Jánn in form likest to mortals. I am the
only daughter of a Jinn chief of noblest strain and my name is
Perí Bánú. So marvel not to hear me tell thee who thou art
and who is the King thy sire and who is Nur al-Nihar, the
daughter of thine uncle. I have full knowledge of all concerning
thyself and thy kith and kin; how thou art one of three
brothers who all and each were daft for love of Princess Nur al-Nihar
and strave to win her from one another to wife. Furthermore
thy sire deemed it best to send you all far and wide over
foreign lands, and thou faredest to far Samarkand and broughtest
back a Magical Apple made with rare art and mystery which
thou boughtest for forty thousand Ashrafis; then by means whereof
thou madest the Princess thy lady-love whole of a grievous malady,
whilst Prince Husayn, thine elder brother, bought for the same
sum of money a Flying Carpet at Bishangarh, and Prince Ali
also brought home a Spying Tube from Shiraz-city. Let this
suffice to show thee that naught is hidden from me of all thy
case; and now do thou tell me in very truth whom dost thou
admire the more, for beauty and loveliness, me or the lady
Nur al-Nihar thy brother’s wife? My heart longeth for thee
with excessive longing and desireth that we may be married
and enjoy the pleasures of life and the joyance of love. So
say me, art thou also willing to wed me, or pinest thou in
preference for the daughter of thine uncle? In the fulness of my
affection for thee I stood by thy side unseen during the archery-meeting
upon the plain of trial, and when thou shottest thy shaft
I knew that it would fall far short of Prince Ali’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6563" id="noteref-6563" epub:type="noteref">6563</a>, so I hent it
in hand ere it touched ground and carried it away from sight,
and striking it upon the iron door caused it rebound and lie flat
upon the rock where thou didst find it. And ever since that day I
have been sitting in expectancy, wotting well that thou wouldst
search for it until thou find it, and by such means I was certified of
bringing thee hither to me.” Thus spake the beautiful maiden
Peri-Banu who with eyes fall of love-longing looked up at Prince
Ahmad; and then with modest shame bent low her brow and
averted her glance.——And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad
held her peace till</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-second Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Then said she:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that when
Prince Ahmad heard these words of Peri-Banu he rejoiced with
joy exceeding, and said to himself; “The Princess Nur al-Nihar
is not within my power to win, and Peri-Banu doth outvie her
in comeliness of favour and in loveliness of form and in gracefulness
of gait.” In short so charmed was he and captivated
that he clean forgot his love for his cousin; and, noting that the
heart of his new enchantress inclined towards him, he replied,
“O my lady, O fairest of the fair, naught else do I desire save
that I may serve thee and do thy bidding all my life long. But
I am of human and thou of non-human birth. Thy friends and
family, kith and kin, will haply be displeased with thee an thou unite
with me in such union.” But she made answer, “I have full sanction
of my parents to marry as I list and whomsoever I may prefer.
Thou sayest that thou wilt be my servant, nay, rather be thou
my lord and master; for I myself and my life and all my good are
very thine, and I shall ever be thy bondswoman. Consent now,
I beseech thee, to accept me for thy wife: my heart doth tell me
thou wilt not refuse my request.” Then Peri-Banu added, “I have
told thee already that in this matter I act with fullest authority.
Besides all this there is a custom and immemorial usage with us
fairy-folk that, when we maidens come to marriageable age and
years of understanding, each one may wed, according the dictates
of her heart, the person that pleaseth her most and whom she
judgeth likely to make her days happy. Thus wife and husband
live with each other all their lives in harmony and happiness. But
if a girl be given away in marriage by the parents, according to
their choice and not hers, and she be mated to a helpmate unmeet
for her, because ill-shapen or ill-conditioned or unfit to win her
affection, then are they twain likely to be at variance each with
other for the rest of their days; and endless troubles result to them
from such ill-sorted union. Nor are we bound by another law
which bindeth modest virgins of the race of Adam; for we freely
announce our preference to those we love, nor must we wait and
pine to be wooed and won.” When Prince Ahmad heard these
words of answer, he rejoiced with exceeding joy and stooping down
essayed to kiss the skirt of her garment, but she prevented him,
and in lieu of her hem gave him her hand. The Prince clasped it
with rapture and according to the custom of that place, he kissed
it and placed it to his breast and upon his eyes. Hereat quoth
the Fairy, smiling a charming smile, “With my hand locked in
thine plight me thy troth even as I pledge my faith to thee, that I
will alway true and loyal be, nor ever prove faithless or fail of constancy.”
And quoth the Prince, “O loveliest of beings, O dearling
of my soul, thinkest thou that I can ever become a traitor to my
own heart, I who love thee to distraction and dedicate to thee my
body and my sprite; to thee who art my queen, the very empress
of me? Freely I give myself to thee, do thou with me whatso
thou wilt.” Hereupon Peri-Banu said to Prince Ahmad, “Thou
art my husband and I am thy wife.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6564" id="noteref-6564" epub:type="noteref">6564</a> This solemn promise made
between thee and me standeth in stead of marriage-contract: no
need have we of Kazi, for with us all other forms and ceremonies
are superfluous and of no avail. Anon I will show thee the chamber
where we shall pass the bride-night; and methinks thou wilt
admire it and confess that there is none like thereto in the whole
world of men.” Presently her handmaidens spread the table and
served up dishes of various kinds, and the finest wines in flagons
and goblets of gold dubbed with jewels. So they twain sat at
meat and ate and drank their sufficiency. Then Peri-Banu took
Prince Ahmad by the hand and led him to her private chamber
wherein she slept; and he stood upon the threshold amazed to see
its magnificence and the heaps of gems and precious stones which
dazed his sight, till recovering himself he cried, “Methinks there
is not in the universe a room so splendid and decked with costly
furniture and gemmed articles such as this.” Quoth Peri-Banu,
“An thou so admire and praise this palace what wilt thou say when
sighting the mansions and castles of my sire the Jann-King?
Haply too when thou shalt behold my garden thou wilt be filled
with wonder and delight; but now ’tis over late to lead thee thither
and night approacheth.” Then she ushered Prince Ahmad into
another room where the supper had been spread, and the splendour
of this saloon yielded in naught to any of the others; nay, rather it
was the more gorgeous and dazzling. Hundreds of wax candles
set in candelabra of the finest amber<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6565" id="noteref-6565" epub:type="noteref">6565</a> and the purest crystal, ranged
on all sides, rained floods of light, whilst golden flowerpots and
vessels of finest workmanship and priceless worth, of lovely shapes
and wondrous art, adorned the niches and the walls.——And as
the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till</p>

<div></div>
<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-third Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Then said she:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that tongue
of man can never describe the magnificence of that room in which
bands of virgin Peris, loveliest of forms and fairest of features,
garbed in choicest garments played on sweet-toned instruments of
mirth and merriment or sang lays of amorous significance to
strains of heart-bewitching music. Then they twain, to wit the
bride and bridegroom sat down at meat, ever and anon delaying
to indulge in toyings and bashful love-play and chaste caresses.
Peri-Banu with her own hands passed the choicest mouthfuls to
Prince Ahmad and made him taste of each dish and dainty, telling
him their names and whereof they were composed. But how
shall I, O auspicious King Shahryar, avail to give thee any notion
of those Jinn-made dishes or to describe with due meed of praise
the delicious flavour of meats such as no mortal ever tasted or
ever beheld? Then, when both had supped, they drank the
choicest wines, and ate with relish sweet conserves and dry fruits
and a dessert of various delicacies. At length, when they had
their requirement of eating and drinking, they retired into another
room which contained a raised daïs of the grandest, bedecked with
gold-purfled cushions and pillows wrought with seed-pearl and
Achæmenian tapestries, whereupon they took seat side by side
for converse and solace. Then came in a troop of Jinns and
fairies who danced and sang before them with wondrous grace and
art; and this pretty show pleased Peri-Banu and Prince Ahmad,
who watched the sports and displays with ever-renewed delight.
At last the newly wedded couple rose and retired, weary of
revelry, to another chamber, wherein they found that the slaves
had dispread the genial bed, whose frame was gold studded with
jewels and whose furniture was of satin and sendal flowered with
the rarest embroidery. Here the guests who attended at the
marriage festival and the handmaids of the palace, ranged in two
lines, hailed the bride and bridegroom as they went within; and
then, craving dismissal, they all departed leaving them to take
their joyance in bed. On such wise the marriage-festival and
nuptial merry-makings were kept up day after day, with new
dishes and novel sports, novel dances and new music; and, had
Prince Ahmad lived a thousand years with mortal kind, never
could he have seen such revels or heard such strains or enjoyed
such love-liesse. Thus six months soon passed in the Fairyland
beside Peri-Banu, whom he loved with a love so fond that he would
not lose her from his sight for a moment’s space; but would feel
restless and ill-at-ease whenas he ceased to look upon her. In like
manner Peri-Banu was fulfilled with affection for him and strove
to please her bridegroom more and more every moment by new
arts of dalliance and fresh appliances of pleasure, until so absorbing
waxed his passion for her that the thought of home and kindred,
kith and kin, faded from his thoughts and fled his mind. But after
a time his memory awoke from slumber and at times he found
himself longing to look upon his father, albeit well did he wot that
it were impossible to find out how the far one fared unless he went
himself to visit him. So one day quoth he to Peri-Banu, “An it
be thy pleasure, I pray thee give me thy command that I may
leave thee for a few days to see my sire, who doubtless grieveth at
my long absence and suffereth all the sorrows of separation from
his son.” Peri-Banu, hearing these words was dismayed with
sore dismay, for that she thought within herself that this was only
an excuse whereby he might escape and leave her after enjoyment
and possession had made her love pall upon the palate of
his mind. So quoth she in reply, “Hast thou forgotten thy
vows and thy plighted troth, that thou wishest to leave me now?
Have love and longing ceased to stir thee, whilst my heart always
throbbeth in raptures as it hath ever done at the very thought of
thee?” Replied the Prince, “O dearling of my soul, my queen,
my empress, what be these doubts that haunt thy mind, and why
such sad misgivings and sorrowful words? I know full well that the
love of thee and thine affection me-wards are even as thou sayest;
and did I not acknowledge this truth or did I prove unthankful
or fail to regard thee with a passion as warm and deep, as tender
and as true as thine own, I were indeed an ingrate and a traitor of
the darkest dye. Far be it from me to desire severance from thee
nor hath any thought of leaving thee never to return at any time
crossed my mind. But my father is now an old man well shotten
in years and he is sore grieved in mind at this long separation
from his youngest son. If thou wilt deign command, I would fain
go visit him and with all haste return to thine arms; yet I would
not do aught in this matter against thy will; and such is my fond
affection for thee that I would fain be at all hours of the day and
watches of the night by thy side nor leave thee for a moment of
time.” Peri-Banu was somewhat comforted by this speech; and
from his looks, words and acts she was certified that Prince Ahmad
really loved her with fondest love and that his heart was true as
steel to her as was his tongue. Whereupon she granted him leave
and liberty to set forth and see his sire, whilst at the same time she
gave him strict commandment not to tarry long with his kith and
kin. Hearken now, O auspicious King Shahryar, to what befel
the Sultan of Hindostan and how it fared with him after the
marriage of Prince Ali to Princess Nur al-Nihar.——And as the
morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Then said she:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that not
seeing Prince Husayn and Prince Ahmad for the space of many
days the Sultan waxed exceeding sad and heavy-hearted, and one
morning after Darbár,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6566" id="noteref-6566" epub:type="noteref">6566</a> asked his Wazirs and Ministers what had
betided them and where they were. Hereto the councillors made
answer saying, “O our lord, and shadow of Allah upon earth, thine
eldest son and fruit of thy vitals and heir apparent to thine Empire
the Prince Husayn, in his disappointment and jealousy and bitter
grief hath doffed his royal robes to become a hermit, a devotee,
renouncing all worldly lusts and gusts. Prince Ahmad thy third
son also in high dudgeon hath left the city; and of him none
knoweth aught, whither he hath fled or what hath befallen him.”
The King was sore distressed and bade them write without stay or
delay and forthright despatch firmans and commands to all the
Nabobs and Governors of the provinces, with strict injunctions to
make straight search for Prince Ahmad and to send him to his sire
the moment he was found. But, albeit the commandments were
carried out to the letter and all the seekers used the greatest diligence
none came upon any trace of him. Then, with increased
sadness of heart, the Sultan ordered his Grand Wazir to go in
quest of the fugitive and the Minister replied, “Upon my head be
it and mine eyes! Thy servant hath already caused most careful
research to be made in every quarter, but not the smallest clue
hath yet come to hand: and this matter troubleth me the more for
that he was dear to me as a son.” The Ministers and Grandees
now understood that the King was overwhelmed with woe, tearful-eyed
and heavy-hearted by reason of the loss of Prince Ahmad;
whereupon bethought the Grand Wazir of a certain witch famed
for the Black Art who could conjure down the stars from heaven;
and who was a noted dweller in the capital. So going to the
Sultan he spake highly of her skill in knowledge of the abstruse,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6567" id="noteref-6567" epub:type="noteref">6567</a>
saying “Let the King, I pray thee, send for this sorceress and
enquire of her concerning his lost son.” And the King replied,
“’Tis well said: let her be brought hither and haply she shall give
me tidings of the Prince and how he fareth.” So they fetched the
Sorceress and set her before the Sultan, who said, “O my good
woman, I would have thee know that ever since the marriage of
Prince Ali with the Lady Nur al-Nihar, my youngest son Prince
Ahmad,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6568" id="noteref-6568" epub:type="noteref">6568</a> who was disappointed in her love, hath disappeared from
our sight and no man knoweth aught of him. Do thou forthright
apply thy magical craft and tell me only this:—Is he yet alive or
is he dead? An he live I would learn where is he and how fareth
he; moreover, I would ask, Is it written in my book of Destiny
that I shall see him yet again?” To this the Witch made reply,
“O Lord of the Age and ruler of the times and tide, ’tis not possible
for me at once to answer all these questions which belong
to the knowledge of Hidden Things; but, if thy Highness deign
grant me one day of grace, I will consult my books of gramarye and
on the morrow will give thee a sufficient reply and a satisfactory.”
The Sultan to this assented, saying, “An thou can give me
detailed and adequate answer, and set my mind at ease after this
sorrow, thou shalt have an exceeding great reward and I will
honour thee with highmost honour.” Next day the Sorceress,
accompanied by the Grand Wazir, craved permission to appear
before the presence, and when it was granted came forward and
said, “I have made ample investigation by my art and mystery
and I have assured myself that Prince Ahmad is yet in the land
of the living. Be not therefore uneasy in thy mind on his account;
but at present, save this only, naught else can I discover regarding
him, nor can I say for sure where he be or how he is to be found.”
At these words the Sultan took comfort, and hope sprang up within
his breast that he should see his son again ere he died. Now
return we to the story of Prince Ahmad. Whenas Peri-Banu
understood that he was bent upon visiting his sire and she was
convinced that his love her-wards remained firm and steadfast as
before, she took thought and determined that it would ill become
her to refuse him leave and liberty for such purpose; so she again
pondered the matter in her mind and debated with herself for many
an hour till at length, one day of the days, she turned to her
husband and said, “Albeit my heart consenteth not to part from
thee for a moment or to lose sight of thee for a single instant, still
inasmuch as thou hast ofttimes made entreaty of me and hast
shown thyself so solicitous to see thy sire, I will no longer baffle
thy wish. But this my favour will depend upon one condition;
otherwise I will never grant thy petition and give thee such permission.
Swear to me the most binding of oaths that thou wilt
haste thee back hither with all possible speed, and thou wilt not
by long absence cause me yearning grief and anxious waiting for
thy safe return to me.” Prince Ahmad, well pleased to win his
wish, thanked her saying, “O my beloved, fear not for me after any
fashion and rest assured I will come back to thee with all haste as
soon as I shall have seen my sire; and life hath no charms for
me away from thy presence. Although I must needs be severed
from thee for a few days, yet will my heart ever turn to thee and
to thee only.” These words of Prince Ahmad gladdened the
heart of Peri-Banu and drove away the darksome doubts and
mysterious misgivings which ever haunted her nightly dreams and
her daily musings.——And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad
held her peace till</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Then said she:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that Peri-Banu
gladdened by these premises addressed her husband, Prince
Ahmad, “So now, as soon as thy heart desireth, go thou and pay
thy respects to thy sire; but ere thou set out I would charge thee
with one charge and look that on no wise thou forget my rede and
my counsel. Speak not to any a single word of this thy marriage,
nor of the strange sights thou hast seen and the wonders thou hast
witnessed; but keep them carefully concealed from thy father and
thy brethren and from thy kith and kin, one and all. This only
shalt thou tell thy sire, so his mind may be set at ease, that thou art
buxom and happy; also that thou hast returned home for a while
only with the object of seeing him and becoming assured of his
welfare.” Then she gave orders to her people, bidding them make
ready for the journey without delay; and when all things were prepared
she appointed twenty horsemen, armed cap-à-pie and fully
accoutred, to accompany her husband, and gave him a horse of
perfect form and proportions, swift as the blinding leven or the
rushing wind; and its housings and furniture were bedeckt with
precious ores and studded with jewels. Then she fell on his neck
and they embraced with warmest love; and as the twain bade
adieu, Prince Ahmad, to set her mind at rest, renewed his protestations
and sware to her again his solemn oath. Then mounting his
horse and followed by his suite (all Jinn-born cavaliers) he set forth
with mighty pomp and circumstance, and riding diligently he soon
reached his father’s capital. Here he was received with loud
acclamations, the like of which had never been known in the land.
The Ministers and Officers of State, the citizens and the Ryots all
rejoiced with exceeding joy to see him once more, and the folk left
their work and with blessings and low obeisances joined the
cavalcade; and, crowding around him in every side, escorted him
to the palace-gates. When the Prince reached the threshold he
dismounted and, entering the audience-hall, fell at his father’s feet
and kissed them in a transport of filial affection. The Sultan, well
nigh distraught for delight at the unexpected sight of Prince Ahmad,
rose from his throne and threw himself upon his son’s neck weeping
for very joy and kissed his forehead saying, “O dear my child, in
despair at the loss of the Lady Nur al-Nihar thou didst suddenly
fly from thy home, and, despite all research, nor trace nor sign of
thee was to be found however sedulously we sought thee; and I,
distracted at thy disappearance, am reduced to this condition in
which thou seest me. Where hast thou been this long while, and
how hast thou lived all this time?” Replied Prince Ahmad, “’Tis
true, O my lord the King, that I was downhearted and distressed
to see Prince Ali gain the hand of my cousin, but that is not the
whole cause of my absence. Thou mayest remember how, when
we three brothers rode at thy command to yonder plain for a trial
of archery, my shaft, albeit the place was large and flat, disappeared
from sight and none could find where it had fallen. Now so it
fortuned that one day in sore heaviness of mind I fared forth alone
and unaccompanied to examine the ground thereabout and try if
haply I could find my arrow. But when I reached the spot where
the shafts of my brothers, Princes Husayn and Ali, had been picked
up, I made search in all directions, right and left, before and behind,
thinking that thereabouts mine also might come to hand; but all
my trouble was in vain: I found neither shaft nor aught else. So
walking onwards in obstinate research, I went a long way, and
at last despairing, I would have given up the quest, for full well I
knew that my bow could not have carried so far, and indeed that
’twere impossible for any marksman to have driven bolt or pile to
such distance, when suddenly I espied it lying flat upon a rock
some four parasangs<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6569" id="noteref-6569" epub:type="noteref">6569</a> distant from this place.” The Sultan
marvelled with much marvel at his words and the Prince presently
resumed, “So when I picked up the arrow, O my lord, and considered
it closely I knew it for the very one I had shot, but admired
in my mind how it had come to fly so far, and I doubted not but
that there was a somewhat mysterious about the matter. While I
thus reflected I came upon the place where I have sojourned ever
since that day in perfect solace and happiness. I may not tell thee
more of my tale than this; for I came only to ease thy mind on
my account, and now I pray thee deign grant me thy supreme
permission that I return forthright to my home of delights. From
time to time I will not cease to wait upon thee and to enquire of
thy welfare with all the affection of a son.” Replied the King,
“O my child, the sight of thee hath gladdened mine eyes; and I
am now satisfied; and not unwillingly I give thee leave to go, since
thou art happy in some place so near hand; but shouldst thou at
any time delay thy coming hither, say me, how shall I be able to
get tidings of thy good health and welfare?” And quoth Prince
Ahmad, “O my lord the King, that which thou requirest of me is
part of my secret and this must remain deep hidden in my breast:
as I said before, I may not discover it to thee nor say aught that
might lead to its discovery. However, be not uneasy in thy soul, for
I will appear before thee full many a time and haply I may irk thee
with continual coming.” “O my son,” rejoined the Sultan, “I
would not learn thy secret an thou would keep it from me, but
there is one only thing I desire of thee, which is, that ever and
anon I may be assured of thine enduring health and happiness.
Thou hast my full permission to hie thee home, but forget not at least
once a month to come and see me even as now thou dost, lest such
forgetfulness cause me anxiety and trouble, cark and care.” So
Prince Ahmad tarried with his father three days full-told, but never
for a moment did the memory of the Lady Peri-Banu fade from
his mind; and on the fourth day he mounted horse and returned
with the same pomp and pageantry wherewith he came.——And
as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Then said she:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that Peri-Banu
joyed with exceeding joy at the sight of Prince Ahmad as he
returned to his home; and it seemed to her as though they had
been parted for three hundred years: such is love that moments of
separation are longsome and weary as twelvemonths. The Prince
offered much of excuses for his short absence and his words delighted
Peri-Banu yet the more. So these twain, lover and beloved,
passed the time in perfect happiness, taking their pleasure one with
other. Thus a month went by and Prince Ahmad never once
mentioned the name of his sire nor expressed a wish to go visit
him according to his promise. Noting this change, the Lady Peri-Banu
said to him one day, “Thou toldest me aforetime that once
in the beginning of each month thou wouldst fare forth and travel
to thy father’s court and learn news of his welfare: why then
neglectest thou so to do, seeing that he will be distressed and
anxiously expecting thee?” Replied Prince Ahmad, “’Tis even as
thou sayest, but, awaiting thy command and thy permission, I
have forborne to propose the journey to thee.” And she made
answer, “Let thy faring and thy returning rest not on my giving
thee liberty of leave. At the beginning of each month as it cometh
round, do thou ride forth, and from this time forwards thou hast no
need to ask permission of me. Stay with thy sire three days full-told
and on the fourth come back to me without fail.” Accordingly,
on the next day betimes in the morning Prince Ahmad took his
departure and as aforetime rode forth with abundant pomp and
parade and repaired to the palace of the Sultan his sire, to whom
he made his obeisance. On like manner continued he to do each
month with a suite of horsemen larger and more brilliant than
before, whilst he himself was more splendidly mounted and equipped.
And whenever the Crescent appeared in the Western sky he fondly
farewelled his wife and paid his visit to the King, with whom he
tarried three whole days, and on the fourth returned to dwell with
Peri-Banu. But, as each and every time he went, his equipage was
greater and grander than the last, at length one of the Wazirs, a
favourite and cup-companion of the King, was filled with wonderment
and jealousy to see Prince Ahmad appear at the palace with
such opulence and magnificence. So he said in himself, “None can
tell whence cometh this Prince, and by what means he hath obtained
so splendid a suite.” Then of his envy and malice that Wazir fell
to plying the King with deceitful words and said, “O my liege lord
and mighty sovran, it ill becometh thee to be thus heedless of Prince
Ahmad’s proceedings. Seest thou not how day after day his retinue
increaseth in numbers and puissance? What an he should plot
against thee and cast thee into prison, and take from thee the reins
of the realm? Right well thou wottest that inasmuch as thou didst
wed Prince Ali to the Lady Nur al-Nihar thou provokedest the wrath
of Prince Husayn and Prince Ahmad; so that one of them in the
bitterness of his soul renounced the pomps and vanities of this
world and hath become a Fakir, whilst the other, to wit, Prince
Ahmad, appeareth before thy presence in such inordinate power and
majesty. Doubtless they both seek their revenge; and, having gotten
thee into their power, the twain will deal treacherously with thee.
So I would have thee beware, and again I say beware; and seize the
forelock of opportunity ere it be too late; for the wise have said:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c013">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Thou canst bar a spring with a sod of clay ✿ But when grown ’twill bear a big host away.”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c014">Thus spake that malicious Wazir; and presently he resumed, “Thou
knowest also that when Prince Ahmad would end his three days’
visits he never asketh thy leave nor farewelleth thee nor biddeth adieu
to any one of his family. Such conduct is the beginning of rebellion
and proveth him to be rancorous of heart. But ’tis for thee in thy
wisdom to decide.” These words sank deep in the heart of the
simple-minded Sultan and grew a crop of the direst suspicions.
He presently thought within himself, “Who knoweth the mind and
designs of Prince Ahmad, whether they be dutiful or undutiful
towards me? Haply he may be plotting vengeance; so it besitteth
me to make enquiries concerning him, to discover where he dwelleth
and by what means he hath attained to such puissance and opulence.”
Filled with these jealous thoughts, he sent in private one day, unbeknown
to the Grand Wazir who would at all times befriend Prince
Ahmad, to summon the Witch; and, admitting her by a secret postern
to his private chamber, asked of her saying, “Thou didst aforetime
learn by thy magical art that Prince Ahmad was alive and didst
bring me tidings of him. I am beholden to thee for this good office,
and now I would desire of thee to make further quest into his case
and ease my mind, which is sore disturbed. Albeit my son still
liveth and cometh to visit me every month, yet am I clean ignorant
of the place wherein he dwelleth and whence he setteth out to see
me; for that he keepeth the matter close hidden from his sire. Go
thou forthright and privily, without the knowledge of any, my Wazirs
and Nabobs, my courtiers and my household; and make thou
diligent research and with all haste bring me word whereabouts he
liveth. He now sojourneth here upon his wonted visit; and, on
the fourth day, without leave-taking or mention of departure to me
or to any of the Ministers and Officers, he will summon his suite
and mount his steed; then will he ride to some little distance hence
and suddenly disappear. Do thou without stay or delay forego
him on the path and lie perdue in some convenient hollow hard by
the road whence thou mayest learn where he hometh; then quickly
bring me tidings thereof.” Accordingly, the Sorceress departed
the presence of the King; and, after walking over the four parasangs,
she hid herself within a hollow of the rocks hard by the place where
Prince Ahmad had found his arrow, and there awaited his arrival.
Early on the morrow the Prince, as was his wont, set out upon his
journey without taking leave of his sire or farewelling any of the
Ministers. So when they drew nigh, the Sorceress caught sight of
the Prince and of the retinue that rode before and beside him; and
she saw them enter a hollow way which forked into a many of byways;
and so steep and dangerous were the cliffs and boulders
about the track that hardly could a footman safely pace that path.
Seeing this the Sorceress bethought her that it must surely lead to
some cavern or haply to a subterraneous passage, or to a souterrain
the abode of Jinns and fairies; when suddenly the Prince and all
his suite vanished from her view. So she crept out of the hiding-place
wherein she had ensconced herself and wandered far and wide seeking,
as diligently as she was able, but never finding the subterraneous
passage nor yet could she discern the iron door which Prince Ahmad
had espied, for none of human flesh and blood had power to see this
save he alone to whom it was made visible by the Fairy Peri-Banu;
furthermore it was ever concealed from the prying eyes of woman-kind.
Then said the Sorceress to herself, “This toil and moil have
I undertaken to no purpose; yea, verily, I have failed to find out
that wherefor I came.” So she went forthright back to the Sultan
and reported to him all that had betided her, how she had lain in
wait amid the cliffs and boulders and had seen the Prince and suite
ride up the most perilous of paths and, having entered a hollow way,
disappear in an eye-twinkling from her sight. And she ended by
saying, “Albeit I strove my utmost to find out the spot wherein
the Prince abideth, yet could I on no wise succeed; and I pray thy
Highness may grant me time to search further into the matter and
to find out this mystery which by skill and caution on my part shall
not long abide concealed.” Answered the Sultan, “Be it as thou
wilt: I grant thee leisure to make enquiry and after a time I shall
await thy return hither.”——And as the morn began to dawn
Shahrazad held her peace till</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Then said she:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that moreover
the King largessed the Witch with a diamond of large size
and of great price, saying, “Take this stone to guerdon for thy
trouble and travail and in earnest of future favours; so, when thou
shalt return and bring me word that thou hast searched and found
out the secret, thou shalt have a Bakhshish of far greater worth and
I will make thy heart rejoice with choicest joy and honour thee
with highmost honour.” So the Sorceress looked forwards to the
coming of the Prince, for well she knew that at the sight of each
crescent he rode home to visit his sire and was bound to abide
with him three days, even as the Lady Peri-Banu had permitted
and had enjoined him. Now when the moon had waxed
and waned, on the day before the Prince would leave home upon
his monthly visit, the Witch betook her to the rocks and sat beside
the place whence she imagined he would issue forth; and next
morning early he and his suite, composed of many a mounted
knight with his esquire afoot, who now always accompanied him
in increasing numbers, rode forth gallantly through the iron doorway
and passed hard by the place where she lay in wait for him.
The Sorceress crouched low upon the ground in her tattered rags;
and, seeing a heap by his way, the Prince at first supposed that a
slice of stone had fallen from the rocks across his path. But as he
drew nigh she fell to weeping and wailing with might and main as
though in sore dolour and distress, and she ceased not to crave his
countenance and assistance with increase of tears and lamentations.
The Prince seeing her sore sorrow had pity on her, and
reining in his horse, asked her what she had to require of him and
what was the cause of her cries and lamentations. At this the
cunning crone but cried the more, and the Prince was affected with
compassion still livelier at seeing her tears and hearing her broken,
feeble words. So when the Sorceress perceived that Prince Ahmad
had ruth on her and would fain show favour to her, she heaved
a heavy sigh and in woeful tones, mingled with moans and groans,
addressed him in these false words, withal holding the hem of his
garment and at times stopping as if convulsed with pain, “O my
lord and lord of all loveliness, as I was journeying from my home
in yonder city upon an errand to such a place, behold, when I came
thus far upon my way, suddenly a hot fit of fever seized me and a
shivering and a trembling, so that I lost all strength and fell down
helpless as thou seest me; and still no power have I in hand or
foot to rise from the ground and to return to my place.” Replied
the Prince, “Alas, O good woman, there is no house at hand where
thou mayest go and be fitly tended and tendered. Howbeit I know a
stead whither, an thou wilt, I can convey thee and where by care
and kindness thou shalt (Inshallah!) soon recover of thy complaint.
Come then with me as best thou canst.” With loud moans and
groans the Witch made answer, “So weak am I in every limb
and helpless that I can by no means rise off the ground or move
save with the help of some friendly hand.” The Prince then bade
one of his horsemen lift up the feeble and ailing old woman and
set her upon his steed; and the cavalier did his lord’s bidding forthright
and mounted her astraddle upon the crupper of his courser:
then, Prince Ahmad rode back with her and entering by the iron
door carried her to his apartment and sent for Peri-Banu. His
wife hurriedly coming forth to the Prince asked him in her flurry,
“Is all well and wherefore hast thou come back and what wouldst
thou that thou hast sent for me?” Prince Ahmad then told her
of the old woman who was healthless and helpless, adding, “Scarce
had I set out on my journey when I espied this ancient dame lying
hard by the roadside, suffering and in sore distress. My heart felt
pity for her to see her in such case and constrained me to bring her
hither as I could not leave her to die among the rocks; and I
pray thee of thy bounty take her in and give her medicines that
she may soon be made whole of this her malady. An thou wilt
show this favour I shall not cease to thank thee and be beholden
to thee.”——And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Then said she:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that Peri-Banu
looked at the old woman and charged a twain of her handmaidens
that they carry her into a room apart and tend her with
the tenderest care and the uttermost of diligence. The attendants
did as she bade them and transported the Sorceress to the
place she had designed. Then Peri-Banu addressed Prince Ahmad
saying, “O my lord, I am pleased to see thy pitiful kindness
towards this ancient dame, and I surely will look to her case even
as thou hast enjoined me; but my heart misgiveth me and much I
fear some evil will result from thy goodness. This woman is not
so ill as she doth make believe, but practiseth deceit upon thee and
I ween that some enemy or envier hath plotted a plot against me
and thee. Howbeit go now in peace upon thy journey.” The
Prince, who on no wise took to heart the words of his wife, presently
replied to her, “O my lady, Almighty Allah forfend thee
from all offence! With thee to help and guard me I fear naught of
ill: I know of no foeman who would compass my destruction,
for I bear no grudge against any living being, and I foresee no evil
at the hands of man or Jann.” Thereupon the Prince again took
leave of Peri-Banu and repaired with his attendants to the palace of
his sire who, by reason of the malice of his crafty Minister, was
inwardly afraid to see his son; but not the less he welcomed him
with great outward show of love and affection. Meanwhile the two
fairy handmaidens, to whom Peri-Banu had given charge of the
Witch, bore her away to a spacious room splendidly furnished; and
laid her on a bed having a mattress of satin and a brocaded coverlet.
Then one of them sat by her side whilst the other with all
speed fetched, in a cup of porcelain, an essence which was a sovereign
draught for ague and fever. Presently they raised her up and
seated her on the couch saying, “Drain thou this drink. It is the
water of the Lions’ Fount and whoso tasteth of the same is forthwith
made whole of what disease soever he hath.” The Sorceress
took the cup with great difficulty and after swallowing the contents
lay back on the bed; and the handmaidens spread the quilt
over her saying, “Now rest awhile and thou shalt soon feel the
virtues of this medicine.” Then they left her to sleep for an hour
or so; but presently the Witch, who had feigned sickness to the
intent only that she might learn where Prince Ahmad abode and
might inform the Sultan thereof, being assured that she had discovered
all that she desired, rose up and summoning the damsels
said to them, “The drinking of that draught hath restored to me
all my health and strength: I now feel hale and hearty once more
and my limbs are filled with new life and vigour. So at once
acquaint your lady herewith, that I may kiss the hem of her robe
and return my thanks for her goodness me-wards, then depart and
hie me home again.” Accordingly, the two handmaidens took the
Sorceress with them and showed her as they went along the several
apartments, each more magnificent and kingly than the other; and
at length they reached the belvedere which was the noblest saloon
of all, and fitted and filled with furniture exceeding costly and
curious. There sat Peri-Banu upon a throne which was adorned
with diamonds and rubies, emeralds, pearls and other gems of
unwonted size and water, whilst round about her stood fairies of
lovely form and features, robed in the richest raiments and awaiting
with folded hands her commandments. The Sorceress marvelled
with extreme marvel to see the splendour of the chambers and their
furniture, but chiefly when she beheld the Lady Peri-Banu seated
upon the jewelled throne; nor could she speak a word for confusion
and awe, but she bent down low and placed her head upon
Peri-Banu’s feet. Quoth the Princess in soft speech and reassuring
tones, “O good woman, it pleaseth me greatly to see thee a guest
in this my palace, and I joy even more to learn that thou be wholly
quit of thy sickness. So now solace thy spirits with walking all
round about the place and my servants will accompany thee and
show thee what there is worthy of thine inspection.” Hereat the
Witch again louted low and kissed the carpet under Peri-Banu’s
feet, and took leave of her hostess in goodly phrase and with great
show of gratitude for her favours. The handmaids then led her
round the palace and displayed to her all the rooms, which dazed
and dazzled her sight so that she could not find words to praise
them sufficiently. Then she went her ways and the fairies
escorted her past the iron doorway whereby Prince Ahmad had
brought her in, and left her, bidding her God-speed and blessing
her; and the foul crone with many thanks took the road to her
own home. But when she had walked to some distance she was
minded to see the iron door, so might she with ease know it
again; so she went back, but lo and behold! the entrance had
vanished and was invisible to her as to all other women. Accordingly,
after searching on all sides and pacing to and fro and finding nor sign
nor trace of palace or portal, she repaired in despair to the city
and, creeping along a deserted pathway, entered the palace,
according to her custom, by the private postern. When safely
within she straightway sent word by an eunuch to the Sultan,
who ordered that she be brought before him. She approached
him with troubled countenance, whereat, perceiving that she had
failed to carry out her purpose, he asked, “What news? Hast
thou accomplished thy design or hast thou been baffled therein?”——And
as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace
till</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Then said she:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
Sorceress, who was a mere creature of the malicious Wazir,
replied, “O King of kings, this matter have I fully searched out
even as thou gavest command, and I am about to tell thee all
that hath betided me. The signs of sorrow and marks of melancholy
thou notest upon my countenance are for other cause which
narrowly concerneth thy welfare.” Then she began to recount
her adventure in these terms, “Now when I had reached the
rocks I sat me down feigning sickness; and, as Prince Ahmad
passed that way and heard my complaining and saw my grievous
condition, he had compassion on me. After some ‘said and say’
he took me with him by a subterranean passage and through an
iron door to a magnificent palace and gave me in charge of a
fairy, Peri-Banu hight, of passing beauty and loveliness, such as
human eye hath never yet seen. Prince Ahmad bade her make
me her guest for some few days and bring me a medicine which
would complete my cure, and she to please him at once appointed
handmaidens to attend upon me. So I was certified that the twain
were one flesh, husband and wife. I feigned to be exceeding
frail and feeble and made as though I had not strength to
walk or even to stand; whereat the two damsels supported me,
one on either side, and I was carried into a room where they
gave me somewhat to drink and put me upon a bed to rest and
sleep. Then thought I to myself:—Verily I have gained the
object wherefor I had feigned sickness; and I was assured that
it availed no more to practise deceit. Accordingly, after a short
while I arose and said to the attendants that the draught which
they had given me to drink had cut short the fever and had
restored strength to my limbs and life to my frame. Then they
led me to the presence of the Lady Peri-Banu, who was exceeding
pleased to see me once more hale and hearty, and bade her handmaidens
conduct me around the palace and show each room in its
beauty and splendour; after which I craved leave to wend my ways
and here am I again to work thy will.” When thus she had
made known to the King all that had betided her, she resumed,
“Perchance, on hearing of the might and majesty, opulence and
magnificence of the Lady Peri-Banu, thou wilt be gladdened and
say within thyself:—’Tis well that Prince Ahmad is wedded to this
Fairy and hath gotten for himself such wealth and power; but to
the thinking of this thy slave the matter is quite other. It is
not well, I dare avouch, that thy son should possess such puissance
and treasures, for who knoweth but that he may by good aid
of Peri-Banu bring about division and disturbance in the realm?
Beware of the wiles and malice of women. The Prince is
bewitched with love of her, and peradventure at her incitement
he may act towards thee otherwise than right, and lay hands on
thy hoards and seduce thy subjects and become master of thy
kingdom; and albeit he would not of his own free will do aught
to his father and his forbears save what was pious and dutiful,
yet the charms of his Princess may work upon him little by little
and end by making him a rebel and what more I may not say.
Now mayest thou see that the matter is a weighty, so be not
heedless but give it full consideration.” Then the Sorceress
made ready to gang her gait when spake the King, saying, “I
am beholden to thee in two things; the first, that thou tookest
upon thyself much toil and travail, and on my behalf riskedst thy
life to learn the truth anent my son Prince Ahmad. Secondly, I
am thankful for that thou hast given me a rede so sound and
such wholesome counsel.” So saying, he dismissed her with the
highmost honour; but no sooner had she left the palace than he,
sore distraught, summoned his second Wazir, the malicious Minister
who had incited him against Prince Ahmad, and when he and his
friends appeared in the presence he laid before them the whole matter
and asked of them, saying, “What is your counsel, and what
must I do to protect myself and my kingdom against the wiles
of this Fairy?” Replied one of his councillors, “’Tis but a
trifling matter and the remedy is simple and nearhand. Command
that Prince Ahmad, who is now within the city if not in the palace,
be detained as one taken prisoner. Let him not be put to
death, lest haply the deed may engender rebellion; but at any
rate place him under arrest and if he prove violent clap him in
irons.”——And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till</p>

<div></div>
<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Sixtieth Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Then said she:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that this felon
counsel pleased the malicious Minister and all his fautors and flatterers
highly approved his rede. The Sultan kept silence and made no
reply, but on the morrow he sent and summoned the Sorceress
and debated with her whether he should or should not cast Prince
Ahmad into prison. Quoth she, “O King of kings, this counsel is
clean contrary to sound sense and right reason. An thou throw
Prince Ahmad into gaol, so must thou also do with all his knights
and their esquires; and inasmuch as they are Jinns and Márids,
who can tell their power of reprisals? Nor prison-cells nor gates
of adamant can keep them in; they will forthwith escape and
report such violence to the Fairy who, wroth with extreme wrath
to find her husband doomed to durance vile like a common malefactor,
and that too for no default or crime but by a treacherous
arrest, will assuredly deal the direst of vengeance on thy head and
do us a damage we shall not be able to forfend. An thou wilt
confide in me, I will advise thee how to act, whereby thou mayest
win thy wish and no evil will come nigh thee or thy kingship.
Thou knowest well that to Jinns and Fairies is power given of
doing in one short moment deeds marvellous and wondrous, which
mortals fail to effect after long years of toil and trouble. Now
whenas thou goest a-hunting or on other expedition, thou requirest
pavilions for thyself and many tents for thy retinue and attendants
and soldiery; and in making ready and transporting such store
much time and wealth are wastefully expended. I would advise,
O King of kings, that thou try Prince Ahmad by the following
test: do thou bid him bring to thee a Sháhmiyánah<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6570" id="noteref-6570" epub:type="noteref">6570</a> so long and so
broad that it will cover and lodge the whole of thy court and
men-at-arms and camp-followers, likewise the beasts of burthen;
and yet it must be so light that a man may hold it in the hollow
of his hand and carry it whithersoever he listeth.” Then, after
holding her peace for a while, she added, still addressing the
Sultan, “And as soon as Prince Ahmad shall acquit himself of
this commission, do thou demand of him a somewhat still greater
and more wondrous wherewith I will make thee ware, and which
he will find grievous of execution. On this wise shalt thou fill
thy treasury with rare inventions and strange, the handicraft of
Jánn, nor will this cease till such time in fine when thy son shall
be at his wits’ end to carry out thy requirements. Then, humbled
and abashed, he will never dare to enter thy capital or even thy
presence; and thus shalt thou be saved from fear of harm at his
hands, and thou shalt not have need to put him in gaol or, worse
still, to do him dead.” Hearing these words of wisdom, the
Sultan made known the Witch’s device to his advisers and asked
them what they deemed thereof. They held their peace and
answered not a word of good or ill; while he himself highly
approved it and said no more. Next day Prince Ahmad came
to visit the King, who welcomed him with overflowing affection
and clasping him to his bosom kissed him on eyes and forehead.
Long time they sat conversing on various subjects, till at length
the Sultan finding an occasion spake thus, “O dear my son, O
Ahmad, for many a day have I been sad at heart and sorrowful
of soul because of separation from thee, and when thou camest
back I was gladdened with great gladness at sight of thee, and
albeit thou didst and dost still withhold from me the knowledge
of thy whereabouts, I refrained from asking thee or seeking to
find out thy secret, since it was not according to thy mind to
tell me of thine abode. Now, however, I have heard say that
thou art wedded to a mighty Jinníyah<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6571" id="noteref-6571" epub:type="noteref">6571</a>, of passing beauty; and
the tidings please me with the highmost possible pleasure. I desire
not to learn aught from thee concerning thy Fairy-wife save whatso
thou wouldst entrust to me of thine own free will; but, say me,
should I at any time, require somewhat of thee, canst thou obtain it
from her? Doth she regard thee with such favour that she will
not deny thee anything thou askest of her?” Quoth the Prince,
“O my lord, what dost thou demand of me? My wife is devoted
to her husband in heart and soul, so prithee let me learn what
it is thou wouldst have of me and her.” Replied the Sultan,
“Thou knowest that ofttimes I fare a-hunting or on some foray
and fray, when I have great need of tents and pavilions and
Shahmiyanahs, with herds and troops of camels and mules and
other beasts of burden to carry the camp from place to place. I
would, therefore, that thou bring me a tent so light that a man may
carry it in the hollow of his hand, and yet so large that it may
contain my court and all my host and camp and suttlers and bât-animals.
An thou wouldst ask the Lady for this gift I know full
well that she can give it; and hereby shalt thou save me much of
trouble in providing carriage for the tentage and spare me much
waste and loss of beasts and men.” The Prince replied, “O my
sire the Sultan, trouble not thy thought. I will at once make
known thy wish to my wife, the Lady Peri-Banu; and, albeit little
I wot an fairies have the faculty of making a pavilion such as thou
describest, or indeed (supposing that they have such power), an she
will grant me or not grant me her aidance; and, moreover, although
I cannot promise thee such present, yet whatsoever lieth in my
ability to do, that will I gladly do for thy service.”——And as the
morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-first Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Then said she:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that quoth
the King to Prince Ahmad, “Shouldst thou perchance fail in
this matter and bring me not the gift required, O my son, I will
never see thy face again. A sorry husband thou, in good sooth,
if thy wife refuse so mean a thing and hasten not to do all thou
biddest her do; giving thee to see that thou art of small value and
consequence in her eyes, and that her love for thee is a quantity
well-nigh to naught. But do thou, O my child, go forth and straightway
ask her for the tent. An she give it thee know thou she
desireth thee and thou art the dearest of all things to her; and I
have been informed that she loveth thee with all her heart and soul
and will by no means refuse thee aught thou requirest, were it even
the balls of her eyes.” Now Prince Ahmad was ever wont to tarry
three days each month with the Sultan his sire, and return to his
spouse on the fourth; but this time he stayed two days only and
farewelled his father on the third. As he passed into the palace
Peri-Banu could not but note that he was sad at heart and downcast
of face; so she asked of him, “Is all well with thee? Why
has thou come to-day and not to-morrow from the presence of the
King thy father, and why carriest thou so triste a countenance?”
Whereupon, after kissing her brow and fondly embracing her, he
told her the whole matter, first to last, and she made answer, “I
will speedily set thy mind at rest, for I would not see thee so
saddened for a moment longer. Howbeit, O my love, from this
petition of the Sultan thy sire I am certified that his end draweth
nigh, and he will soon depart this world to the mercy of Allah the
Almighty.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6572" id="noteref-6572" epub:type="noteref">6572</a> Some enemy hath done this deed and much of mischief
hath made for thee; and the result is that thy father, all
unmindful of his coming doom, doth seek diligently his own
destruction.” The Prince, anxious and alarmed, thus answered his
wife, “Almighty Allah be praised, the King my liege lord is in the
best of health and showeth no sign of disorder or decrepitude: ’tis
but this morning I left him hale and hearty, and in very sooth I never
saw him in better case. Strange, indeed, that thou shouldst ken
what shall betide him before I have told thee aught concerning him,
and especially how he hath come to learn of our marriage and of
our home.” Quoth Peri-Banu, “O my Prince, thou knowest what
I said to thee whenas I saw the old dame whom thou broughtest
hither as one afflicted with the ague and fever. That woman, who
is a Witch of Satan’s breed, hath disclosed to thy father all he
sought to learn concerning this our dwelling-place. And notwithstanding
that I saw full clearly she was nor sick nor sorry, but only
feigning a fever, I gave her medicine to drink which cureth complaints
of all kinds, and she falsely made believe that by its virtues
she had recovered health and strength. So when she came to take
leave of me, I sent her with two of my damsels and bid them
display to her every apartment in the palace together with its
furniture and decorations, that she might better know the condition
of me and thee. Now all this did I on thy account only, for
thou badest me show compassion to the ancient woman and I was
rejoiced to see her departing safe and sound and in the best
of spirits. Save her alone, no human being had ever power to
know aught of this place, much less to come hither.” Prince
Ahmad hearing these words thanked and praised her and said, “O
sun-faced beauty, I would beg of thee to grant me a boon whereof
my father hath made request of me; to wit, a Shahmiyanah of such
dimensions that it may shelter him and his many, his camp and
bât-cattle and withal may be carried in the hollow of the hand.
An such marvel exist I wot not, yet would I do my utmost to procure
it, and carry it to him right loyally.” Quoth she, “Why
trouble thyself for so small a matter? I will forthright send for it
and give it thee.” Then she summoned one of her handmaids who
was treasurer to her and said, “O Nur Jehán,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6573" id="noteref-6573" epub:type="noteref">6573</a> go thou at once and
bring me a pavilion of such and such a fashion.” So she fared forth
without delay and as quickly came back with the pavilion which,
at her lady’s bidding, she placed in the palm of Prince Ahmad’s
hand.——And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-second Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Then said she:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that Prince
Ahmad hent the pavilion in hand and thought to himself,
“What is this Peri-Banu giveth me? Surely she doth make
a mock of me.” His wife, however, reading his mind in his
face, fell to laughing aloud, and asked, “What is it, O my dearling
Prince? Dost thou think that I am jesting and jibing at thee?”
Then she continued, addressing the treasurer Nur Jehan, “Take
now yon tent from Prince Ahmad and set it upon the plain
that he may see its vast size and know if it be such an one as
required by the Sultan his sire.” The handmaid took the pavilion
and pitched it afar from the Palace; and yet one end thereof
reached thereto from the outer limit of the plain; and so immense
was its size that (as Prince Ahmad perceived) there was room
therein for all the King’s court; and, were two armies ranged
under it with their camp-followers and bât-animals, one would
on no wise crowd or inconvenience the other. He then begged
pardon of Peri-Banu saying, “I wot not that the Shahmiyanah
was so prodigious of extent and of so marvellous a nature;
wherefore I misdoubted when first I saw it.” The Treasurer
presently struck the tent and returned it to the palm of his hand;
then, without stay or delay, he took horse and followed by his
retinue rode back to the royal presence, where after obeisance and
suit and service he presented the tent. The Sultan also, at first
sight of the gift, thought it a small matter, but marvelled with
extreme marvel to see its size when pitched, for it would have
shaded his capital and its suburbs. He was not, however, wholly
satisfied, for the size of the pavilion now appeared to him superfluous;
but his son assured him that it would always fit itself to its
contents. He thanked the Prince for bringing him so rare a present,
saying, “O my son, acquaint thy consort with my obligation to her
and offer my grateful thanks for this her bounteous gift. Now indeed
know I of a truth that she doth love thee with the whole of her
heart and soul and all my doubts and fears are well-nigh set at
rest.” Then the King commanded they should pack up the
tent and store it with all care in the royal treasury. Now strange
it is but true, that when the Sultan received this rare present from
the Prince, the fear and doubt, the envy and jealousy of his son,
which the Witch and the malicious Wazir and his other ill-advisers
had bred in his breast, waxed greater and livelier than before; because
he was now certified that in very truth the Jinniyah was
gracious beyond measure to her mate and that, notwithstanding
the great wealth and power of the sovereign, she could outvie him
in mighty deeds for the aidance of her husband. Accordingly, he
feared with excessive fear lest haply she seek opportunity to slay
him in favour of the Prince whom she might enthrone in his
stead. So he bade bring the Witch who had counselled him aforetime,
and upon whose sleight and malice he now mainly relied.
When he related to her the result of her rede, she took thought for
a while; then, raising her brow said, “O King of kings, thou
troublest thyself for naught: thou needest only command Prince
Ahmad to bring thee of the water of the Lions’ Spring. He must
perforce for his honour’s sake fulfil thy wish, and if he fail he will
for very shame not dare to show his face again at court. No better
plan than this canst thou adopt; so look to it nor loiter on thy
way.” Next day at eventide, as the Sultan was seated in full
Darbar surrounded by his Wazirs and Ministers, Prince Ahmad
came forwards and making due obeisance took seat by his side and
below him. Hereat, the King addressed him, as was his wont, with
great show of favour saying, “It delighteth me mightily that thou
hast brought me the tent I required of thee; for surely in my
Treasury there be naught so rare and strange. Yet one other
thing lack I, and couldst thou bring it me I shall rejoice with joy
exceeding. I have heard tell that the Jinniyah, thy consort,
maketh constant use of a water which floweth from the Lions’
Spring, the drinking whereof doeth away with fevers and all other
deadly diseases. I know thou art anxious that I live in health;
and thou wilt gladden me by bringing somewhat of that water, so
I may drink thereof when occasion shall require, and well I wot
that, as thou valuest my love and affection thee-wards, thou wilt
not refuse to grant me my request.” Prince Ahmad on hearing
this demand was struck with surprise that his sire should so soon
make a second demand. So he kept silence awhile, thinking within
himself, “I have managed by some means to obtain the tent from
the Lady Peri-Banu, but Allah only knoweth how she will now
act, and whether this fresh request will or will not rouse her wrath.
Howbeit I know that she will on no wise deny me any boon I may
ask of her.” So after much hesitation Prince Ahmad made
reply, “O my lord the King, I have no power to do aught in this
matter, which resteth only with my spouse the Princess; yet will I
petition her to give the water; and, if she vouchsafe consent I will
bring it straight to thee. Indeed I cannot promise thee such boon
with all certainty: I would gladly do my endeavour in all and
everything that can benefit thee, but to ask her for this water is a
work more weighty than asking for the tent.” Next day the Prince
took his departure and returned to Peri-Banu; and after loving
embraces and greetings quoth he, “O my lady and light of my
eyes, the Sultan my sire sendeth thee his grateful thanks for the
granting of his wish; to wit, the pavilion; and now he adventureth
himself once more and, certified of thy bounty and beneficence, he
would pray from thy hand the boon of a little water from the Lions’
Spring. Withal I would assure thee that an the giving of this
water please thee not, let the matter be clean forgotten; for to do all
thou willest is my one and only wish.” Peri-Banu made reply,
“Methinks the Sultan, thy sire, would put both me and thee to the
test by requiring such boons as those suggested to him by the
Sorceress.”——And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held
her peace till</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-third Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Then said she:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that Peri-Banu
said further to Prince Ahmad, “Natheless I will grant this largesse
also as the Sultan hath set his mind upon it, and no harm shall
come therefrom to me or to thee, albe ’tis a matter of great risk and
danger, and it is prompted by not a little of malice and ungraciousness.
But give careful heed to my words, nor neglect thou aught
of them, or thy destruction is certain-sure. I now will tell thee
what to do. In the hall of yonder castle which riseth on that
mountain is a fountain sentinelled by four lions fierce and
ravening; and they watch and ward the path that leadeth thereto,
a pair standing on guard whilst the other two take their turn to
rest, and thus no living thing hath power to pass by them. Yet
will I make known to thee the means whereby thou mayest win
thy wish without any hurt or harm befalling thee from the furious
beasts.” Thus saying she drew from an ivory box a clew of thread
and, by means of a needle one of those wherewith she had been plying
her work, made thereof a ball. This she placed in the hands of
her husband, and said, “First, be thou careful that thou keep about
thee with all diligence this ball, whose use I shall presently explain
to thee. Secondly, choose for thyself two horses of great speed, one
for thine own riding, whilst on the other thou shalt load the carcass
of a freshly slaughtered sheep cut into four quarters. In the third
place, take with thee a phial wherewith I will provide thee, and
this is for carrying the water which thou, Inshallah—God willing—shalt
bring back. As soon as the morn shall morrow do thou
arise with the light and go forth riding thy chosen steed and
leading the other alongside of thee by the reins. When thou shalt
reach the iron portals which open upon the castle-court, at no
great distance from the gate, do thou cast the ball of thread upon
the ground before thee. Forthwith it will begin rolling onwards
of its own will towards the castle door; and do thou follow it
through the open entrance until such time as it stop its course.
At this moment thou shalt see the four lions; and the two that
wake and watch will rouse the twain that sleep and rest. All four
will turn their jaws to the ground and growl and roar with
hideous howlings, and make as though about to fall upon thee and
tear thee limb from limb. However, fear not nor be dismayed, but
ride boldly on and throw to the ground from off the led-horse the
sheep’s quarters, one to each lion. See that thou alight not from
thy steed, but gore his ribs with thy shovel-stirrup<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6574" id="noteref-6574" epub:type="noteref">6574</a> and ride with
all thy might and main up to the basin which gathereth the water.
Here dismount and fill the phial whilst the lions will be busied
eating. Lastly, return with all speed and the beasts will not
prevent thy passing by them.” Next day, at peep of morn, Prince
Ahmad did according to all that Peri-Banu had bidden him and
rode forth to the castle. Then, having passed through the iron
portals and crossed the court and opened the door, he entered the
hall, where he threw the quarters of the sheep before the lions, one
to each, and speedily reached the Spring. He filled his phial with
water from the basin and hurried back with all haste. But when he
had ridden some little distance he turned about and saw two of the
guardian lions following upon his track; however, he was on no wise
daunted but drew his sabre from the sheath to prepare him for self-protection.
Hereat one of the twain seeing him bare his brand for
defence, retired a little way from the road and, standing at gaze,
nodded his head and wagged his tail, as though to pray the Prince
to put up his scimitar and to assure him that he might ride in
peace and fear no peril. The other lion then sprang forwards ahead
of him and kept close him, and the two never ceased to escort him
until they reached the city, nay even the gate of the Palace. The
second twain also brought up the rear till Prince Ahmad had
entered the Palace-door; and, when they were certified of this, all
four went back by the way they came. Seeing such wondrous
spectacle, the townsfolk all fled in dire dismay, albeit the
enchanted beasts molested no man; and presently some mounted
horsemen espying their lord riding alone and unattended came up
to him and helped him alight. The Sultan was sitting in his
audience-hall conversing with his Wazirs and Ministers when his
son appeared before him; and Prince Ahmad, having greeted him and
blessed him and, in dutiful fashion, prayed for his permanence of
existence and prosperity and opulence, placed before his feet the phial
full of the water from the Lions’ Spring, saying, “Lo, I have brought
thee the boon thou desiredst of me. This water is most rare and
hard to obtain; nor is there in all thy Treasure-house aught so
notable and of such value as this. If ever thou fall ill of any
malady (Almighty Allah forfend this should be in thy Destiny!)
then drink a draught thereof and forthwith thou shalt be made
whole of whatso distemper thou hast.” When Prince Ahmad had
made an end of speaking, the Sultan, with all love and affection,
grace and honour, embraced him and kissed his head; then,
seating him on his right said, “O my son, I am beholden to thee,
beyond count and measure, for that thou hast adventured thy life
and brought this water with great irk and risk from so perilous
a place.” Now the Witch had erewhile informed the King concerning
the Lions’ Spring and of the mortal dangers which beset
the site; so that he knew right well how gallant was his son’s derring-do;
and presently he said, “Say me, O my child, how couldst
thou venture thither and escape from the lions and broughtest
back the water, thyself remaining safe and sound?”——And as
the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-fourth Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Then said she:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
Prince replied, “By thy favour, O my lord the Sultan, have I
returned in safety from that stead mainly because I did according
to the bidding of my spouse, the Lady Peri-Banu; and I have
brought the water from the Lions’ Spring only by carrying out
her commands.” Then he made known to his father all that had
befallen him in going and returning; and when the Sultan noted
the pre-eminent valiance and prowess of his son he only feared
the more, and the malice and the rancour, envy and jealousy which
filled his heart waxed tenfold greater than before. However, dissembling
his true sentiments he dismissed Prince Ahmad and
betaking him to his private chamber at once sent word to bid the
Witch appear in the presence; and when she came, he told her of
the Prince’s visit and all about the bringing of the water from the
Lions’ Spring. She had already heard somewhat thereof by reason of
the hubbub in the city at the coming of the lions; but, as soon as
she had given ear to the whole account, she marvelled with mighty
marvel and, after whispering in the Sultan’s ear her new device,
said to him in triumph, “O King of kings, this time thou shalt
lay a charge on the Prince and such commandment methinks will
trouble him and it shall go hard with him to execute aught
thereof.” “Thou sayest well,” replied the Sovran, “now indeed
will I try this plan thou hast projected for me.” Wherefore, next day
whenas Prince Ahmad came to the presence of his sire, the King
said to him, “O dear my child, it delighteth me exceedingly to see
thy virtue and valour and the filial love wherewith thou art fulfilled,
good gifts chiefly shown by obtaining for me the two rarities I
asked of thee. And now one other and final requirement I have
of thee; and, shouldst thou avail to satisfy my desire, I shall be
well pleased in my beloved son and render thanks to him for the
rest of my days.” Prince Ahmad answered, “What is the boon
thou requirest? I will for my part do thy bidding as far as in
me lieth.” Then quoth the King in reply to the Prince, “I would
fain have thee bring me a man of size and stature no more than
three feet high, with beard full twenty ells in length, who beareth
on his shoulder a quarter staff of steel, thirteen score pounds in
weight, which he wieldeth with ease and swingeth around his head
without wrinkle on brow, even as men wield cudgels of wood.”
On this wise the Sultan, led astray by the Doom of Destiny and
heedless alike of good and evil, asked that which should bring
surest destruction upon himself. Prince Ahmad also, with blind
obedience out of pure affection to his parent, was ready to supply
him with all he required unknowing what was prepared for him
in the Secret Purpose. Accordingly he said, “O my sire the
Sultan, I trow me ’twill be hard to find, all the world over, a man
such as thou desirest, still I will work my best to do thy bidding.”
Thereupon the Prince retired from the presence and returned, as
usual, to his palace where he greeted Peri-Banu with love and
gladness; but his face was troubled and his heart was heavy at
the thought of the King’s last behest. Perceiving his pre-occupation
the Princess asked him, saying, “O dear my lord, what
tidings bringest thou for me to-day?” Hereto replied he,
“The Sultan at each visit requireth of me some new thing and
burtheneth me with his requests; and to-day he purposeth to try
me and, in the hopes of putting me to shame, he asketh somewhat
which ’twere vain to hope I can find in all the world.” Thereupon
Prince Ahmad told her all the King had said to him.——And
as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-fifth Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Then said she:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that Peri-Banu
hearing these words said to the Prince, “Trouble not thyself at all
in this matter. Thou didst venture at great risk to carry off for thy
father water from the Lions’ Spring and thou succeededst in winning
thy wish. Now this task is on no wise more difficult or dangerous than
was that: nay, ’tis the easier, for that he thou describest is none other
than Shabbar, my brother-german. Although we both have the same
parents, yet it pleased Almighty Allah to enform us in different
figures and to make him unlike his sister as being in mortal mould
can be. Moreover he is valiant and adventurous, always seeking
some geste and exploit whereby to further my interest, and right
willingly doth he carry out whatso he undertaketh. He is shaped
and formed as the Sultan thy sire hath described, nor useth he any
weapons save the Nabbút<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6575" id="noteref-6575" epub:type="noteref">6575</a> or quarter staff of steel. And see now
I will send for him, but be not thou dismayed at sighting him.”
Replied Prince Ahmad, “If he be in truth thine own brother what
matter how he looketh? I shall be pleased to see him as when
one welcometh a valued friend or a beloved kinsman. Wherefore
should I fear to look upon him?” Hearing these words Peri-Banu
despatched one of her attendants who brought to her from her private
treasury a chafing-dish of gold; then she bade a fire be lit therein,
and sending for a casket of noble metals studded with gems, the gift
of her kinsmen, she took therefrom some incense and cast it upon
the flames. Herewith issued a dense smoke spireing high in air
and spreading all about the palace; and a few moments after, Peri-Banu
who had ceased her conjurations cried, “Lookye my brother
Shabbar cometh! canst thou distinguish his form?” The Prince
looked up and saw a mannikin in stature dwarfish and no more
than three feet high, and with a boss on breast and a hump
on back; withal he carried himself with stately mien and majestic
air. On his right shoulder was borne his quarter staff of steel
thirteen score pounds in weight. His beard was thick and twenty
cubits in length but arranged so skilfully that it stood clear off
from the ground; he wore also a twisted pair of long mustachios
curling up to his ears, and all his face was covered with long pile.
His eyes were not unlike unto pig’s eyes; and his head, on which
was placed a crown-like coiffure, was enormous of bulk, contrasting
with the meanness of his stature. Prince Ahmad sat calmly beside his
wife, the Fairy, and felt no fear as the figure approached; and presently
Shabbar walked up and glancing at him asked Peri-Banu saying,
“Who be this mortal who sitteth hard by thee?” Hereto she
replied, “O my brother, this is my beloved husband, Prince Ahmad,
son of the Sultan of Hindostan. I sent thee not an invitation to
the wedding as thou wast then engaged on some great expedition;
now, however, by the grace of Almighty Allah thou hast returned
triumphant and victorious over thy foes, wherefore I have summoned
thee upon a matter which nearly concerneth me.” Hearing these
words Shabbar looked graciously at Prince Ahmad, saying, “O
my beloved sister, is there any service I can render to him?” and she
replied, “The Sultan his sire desireth ardently to see thee, and I
pray thee go forthright to him and take the Prince with thee by
way of guide.” Said he, “This instant I am ready to set forth;”
but said she, “Not yet, O my brother. Thou art fatigued with
journeying; so defer until the morrow thy visit to the King, and
this evening I will make known to thee all that concerneth Prince
Ahmad.” Presently the time came; so Peri-Banu informed her
brother Shabbar concerning the King and his ill-counsellors; but
she dwelt mainly upon the misdeeds of the old woman, the
Witch; and how she had schemed to injure Prince Ahmad and
despitefully prevent his going to city or court, and she had gained
such influence over the Sultan that he had given up his will to
hers and ceased not doing whatso she bade him. Next day at
dawn Shabbar the Jinn and Prince Ahmad set out together upon
a visit to the Sultan; and, when they had reached the city gates,
all the folk, nobles and commons, were struck with consternation
at the dwarf’s hideous form; and, flying on every side in affright
and running into shops and houses, barred the doors and closed
the casements and hid themselves therein. So panic-stricken
indeed was their flight that many feet lost shoes and sandals in
running, while from the heads of others their loosened turbands
fell to earth. And when they twain approached the palace through
streets and squares and market-places desolate as the Desert of
Samáwah,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6576" id="noteref-6576" epub:type="noteref">6576</a> all the keepers of the gates took to their heels at sight
of Shabbar and fled, so there was none to hinder their entering.
They walked straight on to the audience-chamber where the
Sultan was holding Darbar, and they found in attendance on him
a host of Ministers and Councillors, great and small, each standing in
his proper rank and station. They too on seeing Shabbar speedily
took flight in dire dismay and hid themselves; also the guards had
deserted their posts nor cared in any way to let or stay the twain.
The Sovran still sat motionless on his throne, where Shabbar went
up to him with lordly mien and royal dignity and cried, “O King,
thou hast expressed a wish to see me; and lo, I am here. Say
now what wouldst thou have me do?”——And as the morn began
to dawn Shahrazad held her peace till</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-sixth Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>THEN said she:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that the
King made no reply to Shabbar, but held up his hands before his
eyes that he might not behold that frightful figure, and turning his
head would fain have fled in terror. Shabbar was filled with fury
at this rudeness on the part of the Sultan, and was wroth with
exceeding wrath to think that he had troubled himself to come at
the bidding of such a craven, who now on seeing him would fain
run away. So the Jinn, without an instant’s delay, raised his
quarter staff of steel, and, swinging it twice in air, before Prince
Ahmad could reach the throne or on any wise interfere, struck the
Sultan so fiercely upon the poll that his skull was smashed and
his brains were scattered over the floor. And when Shabbar had
made an end of this offender, he savagely turned upon the Grand
Wazir who stood on the Sultan’s right, and incontinently would
have slain him also, but the Prince craved pardon for his life and
said, “Kill him not: he is my friend and hath at no time said one
evil word against me. But such is not the case with the others,
his fellows.” Hearing these words the infuriated Shabbar fell
upon the Ministers and ill-counsellors on either side, to wit, all who
had devised evil devices against Prince Ahmad, and slew them
each and every and suffered none to escape save only those who
had taken flight and hidden themselves. Then, going from the hall
of justice to the courtyard, the Dwarf said to the Wazir whose life
the Prince had saved, “Harkye, there is a Witch who beareth
enmity against my brother, the husband of my sister. See that
thou produce her forthright; likewise the villain who filled his
father’s mind with hate and malice, envy and jealousy against
him, so may I quite them in full measure for their misdeeds.” The
Grand Wazir produced them all, first the Sorceress, and then the
malicious minister with his rout of fautors and flatterers, and
Shabbar felled them one after the other with his quarter staff of steel
and killed them pitilessly, crying to the Sorceress, “This is the end
of all thy machinations with the King, and this is the fruit of thy
deceit and treachery; so learn not to feign thyself sick.” And in
the blindness of his passion he would have slain all the inhabitants
of the city, but Prince Ahmad prevented him and pacified him
with soft and flattering words. Hereupon Shabbar habited his
brother in the royal habit and seated him on the throne and
proclaimed him Sultan of Hindostan. The people all, both high
and low, rejoiced with exceeding joy to hear these tidings, for
Prince Ahmad was beloved by every one; so they crowded to
swear fealty and bring presents and Nazaránahs<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6577" id="noteref-6577" epub:type="noteref">6577</a> and raised shouts
of acclamation crying out, “Long live King Ahmad!” When all
this was done, Shabbar sent for his sister, Peri-Banu, and made her
Queen under the title of Shahr-Banu;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6578" id="noteref-6578" epub:type="noteref">6578</a> and in due time taking
leave of her and of King Ahmad, the Jinni returned to his own
home.——And as the morn began to dawn Shahrazad held her
peace till</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div>The end of the Six Hundred and Sixty-seventh Night.</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Then said she:——I have heard, O auspicious King, that after
these things King Ahmad summoned Prince Ali his brother and
Nur al-Nihar and made him governor of a large city hard by the
capital, and dismissed him thither in high state and splendour.
Also he commissioned an official to wait upon Prince Husayn and
tell him all the tidings, and sent word saying, “I will appoint
thee ruler over any capital or country thy soul desireth; and, if thou
consent, I will forward thee letters of appointment.” But inasmuch
as the Prince was wholly content and entirely happy in
Darwaysh-hood, he cared naught for rule or government or aught
of worldly vanities; so he sent back the official with his duty and
grateful thanks, requesting that he might be left to live his life in
solitude and renunciation of matters mundane. Now when Queen
Shahrazad had made an end of telling her story and yet the
night was not wholly spent, King Shahryar spake saying, “This
thy story, admirable and most wonderful, hath given me extreme
delight; and I pray thee do thou tell us another tale till such time
as the last hours of this our night be passed.” She replied, “Be
it as thou wilt, O auspicious King: I am thy slave to do as thou
shalt bid.” Then she began to relate the tale of</p>

  
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
