<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="volume-15" id="chapter-15-25" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Index</h2>
			<ul class="c005 index">
				<li class="c018">A’atú Al-Wírah = gave in their submission, <a href="#Page_405">405</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— corresponds with Turk. “Wírah wírmek” = to capitulate (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_405">405</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ablution of whole body necessary after car. cop., <a href="#Page_93">93</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Absurdities to a European reader, are but perfectly natural to an Eastern coffee-house audience, <a href="#Page_477">477</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Abtar = tailless (as applied to class of tales such as “Loves of Al-Hayfa and Yusuf”), <a href="#Page_210">210</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Abú Hamámah = “Father of a Pigeon” (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, surpassing in swiftness the carrier-pigeon), <a href="#Page_380">380</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Abúyah (a Fellah, vulg. for “Abí”), <a href="#Page_418">418</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Adí in Egypt. (not Arabic) is = that man, the (man) here, <a href="#Page_118">118</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Adi (<em>Arab.</em>) = So it is, <a href="#Page_448">448</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Adíní = Here am I, <a href="#Page_118">118</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">’Adím al-Zauk (<em>Arab.</em>), <em>tr.</em> “Lack-tacts” = to our deficiency in taste, manners, etc. (Here denoting “practical joking”), <a href="#Page_455">455</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Áfák Al- (<em>pl.</em> of Ufk) “elegant” for the universe (<em>tr.</em> “all the horizons”), <a href="#Page_66">66</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Afrákh al-Jinn <em>lit.</em> = Chicks of the Jinns (<em>tr.</em> “Babes of the Jinns”), <a href="#Page_202">202</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ahmar = red, ruddy-brown, dark brown, <a href="#Page_347">347</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ahú ’inda-k, <em>tr.</em> “Whatso thou broughtest here it be” (Pure Fellah speech), <a href="#Page_366">366</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ahú ma’í = “Here it is with me” (Pure Fellah speech), <a href="#Page_265">265</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ahyaf (alluding to Al-Hayfá) = (with waist full-) slight, <a href="#Page_175">175</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Air hath struck me and cut my joints,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “I suffer from an attack of rheumatism” (common complaint in even the hottest climates), <a href="#Page_160">160</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">’Ajam = Barbarian-land, <a href="#Page_213">213</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">’Ajúz, a woman who ceases to have her monthly period (<em>tr.</em> “the old woman”), <a href="#Page_52">52</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Akhbarú-hu (<em>Arab.</em>) = have given him (Yahyà) tidings, <a href="#Page_156">156</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Akík = carnelian stone, <a href="#Page_130">130</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— Al- (<em>Arab.</em>) = carnelian, <a href="#Page_52">52</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Akrás al-Jullah,” <em>tr.</em> “dung-cakes” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_292">292</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">’Alà-Aklí, <em>tr.</em> “thou deservest naught for this,” <a href="#Page_85">85</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“’Alà ghayri tarík” (<em>Arab.</em>) = “out of the way” (like <em>Pers.</em> “bí Ráh”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_224">224</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Alà hámati-hi = “upon the poll of his head” (rendered here “upon the nape of his neck”), <a href="#Page_191">191</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ali bin Ibrahim, “a faithful Eunuch” (Scott), <a href="#Page_184">184</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Allah! Allah!” = I conjure thee by God, <a href="#Page_302">302</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— Almighty hath done this = <em>here lit.</em> “hath given it to him,” <a href="#Page_27">27</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— (do thou be steadfast of purpose and rely upon) = “Let us be off,” pop. parlance, <a href="#Page_66">66</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“—— kill all womankind,” <a href="#Page_304">304</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— (O worshipper of) (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “O Moslem”), opposed to enemy of Allah = “a non-Moslem”, <a href="#Page_460">460</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“—— sent down a book confirmed,” a passage not Koranic, <a href="#Page_47">47</a> (not a literal</li>
				<li class="c018">quotation, but alludes to Koran <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <a href="#Page_5">5</a>) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_47">47</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Allah (sued for pardon of Almighty) a pious exclamation (“Astaghfiru ’llah”), <a href="#Page_136">136</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Alláho Akbar = God is most great (war cry), <a href="#Page_403">403</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Anakati-h (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>tr.</em> “neck,” <a href="#Page_427">427</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Ana ’l-Tabíb, al-Mudáwi” (<em>Arab.</em>) = I am the leach, the healer, <a href="#Page_326">326</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Aná min ahli Zálika,” <em>tr.</em> “I am of the folk of these things” (vulg. equiv. would be “Kizí,” for “Kazálika,” “Kazá” = so it is), <a href="#Page_50">50</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">’Anfakati-h = the hair between the lower lips and the chin, also chin itself (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_427">427</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Anta jáib(un) bas rájul (an) wáhid (an)” = veritable and characteristic peasant’s jargon, <a href="#Page_359">359</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ant’ amilta maskhará (for maskharah) matah (for matà), idiomatical Fellah-tongue, <a href="#Page_269">269</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ant’ aysh (for “man”) decidedly not complimentary “What (thing) art thou?” 298.</li>
				<li class="c018">Aorist, preceded by preposition “bi,” <a href="#Page_432">432</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Arabia Deserta” (Mr. Doughty’s) quoted 10, <a href="#Page_53">53</a>, <a href="#Page_405">405</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Arsh,” = the Ninth Heaven, <a href="#Page_178">178</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Art thou (Al-Hajjáj) from Cairo,” a neat specimen of the figure anachronism. (Al-Hajjáj died <abbr epub:type="se:era">AH</abbr> 95; Cairo built <abbr epub:type="se:era">AH</abbr> 358), <a href="#Page_41">41</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">’Arús muhallíyah “a bride tricked out,” <a href="#Page_468">468</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">’Ashama <em>lit.</em> = he greeded for, <a href="#Page_285">285</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ashkhákh Al- (<em>Arab.</em>), <em>pl.</em> of Shakhkh = <em>lit.</em> the “Stales” (<em>tr.</em> “skite and piss”) (Steingass reads “bi ’l-Shakhákh” the usual modern word for urine), <a href="#Page_265">265</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ass (loan of) usually granted gratis in Fellah villages and Badawi camps, <a href="#Page_460">460</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Assemblage of dramatis personæ at end of a scene highly artistic and equally improbable, <a href="#Page_31">31</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ass (the “cab” of modern Egypt), <a href="#Page_281">281</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Astaghfiru ’llah,” a pious exclamation, humbling oneself before the Creator (<em>tr.</em> “sued for pardon of Almighty Allah”), <a href="#Page_136">136</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Audáj (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>pl.</em> of “Wadaj,” applying indiscriminately to the carotid arteries and jugular veins, <a href="#Page_340">340</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Audán (<em>pl.</em> of the pop. “Widn” or “Wudn” for the literary “Uzn” = ear) <span class="sc">St.</span>, <a href="#Page_301">301</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">’Aurat = nakedness, <em>tr.</em> “shame,” <a href="#Page_75">75</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">’Ausaj = bushes, <a href="#Page_456">456</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Ayoh” (in text), <em>tr.</em> “here he is”; a corr. of “Í (or Ayy) hú” = yes indeed he, <a href="#Page_265">265</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Aywah (different spelling for “aywa” = “yes indeed,”) or contraction for Ay (Í) wa ’lláhi = “yes, by Allah” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_265">265</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Azay má tafút-ní? = how canst thou quit me? 290.</li>
				<li class="c005">Báb al-Nasr, the grand old Eastern or Desert-gate of Cairo, <a href="#Page_457">457</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Bábúj (from “Bábúg” from the <em>Pers.</em> “Pay-púsh” = foot-clothing), <em>tr.</em> “papoosh,” <a href="#Page_442">442</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Badawí tent, <a href="#Page_116">116</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Badr Al (<em>pl.</em> Budúr) = the “Full Moon,” <a href="#Page_198">198</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Badrah (<em>Arab.</em>) = a purse of ten thousand dirhams, <a href="#Page_58">58</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Badrat Zahab = a purse of gold (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_58">58</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Bahlúl, a famous type of madman, <a href="#Page_88">88</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Bákúr = driving-sticks, <a href="#Page_10">10</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ballát, limestone slabs cut in the Torah quarries south of Cairo, <a href="#Page_80">80</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Baltah-ji, a pioneer one of the old divisions of the Osmanli troops, surviving as a family name amongst Levantines, <a href="#Page_336">336</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Baltah, for Turk. “Báltah” = an axe, a hatchet, <a href="#Page_336">336</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Banj al-tayyár, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, volatile = that which flies fastest to the brain (<em>tr.</em> “flying Bhang”), <a href="#Page_26">26</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Banú Ghálib, <a href="#Page_43">43</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Banú Thakíf, a noble tribe sprung from Iyád, <a href="#Page_46">46</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Barber, being a surgeon ready to bleed a madman, <a href="#Page_277">277</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— custom of, among Eastern Moslems, <a href="#Page_106">106</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Bashkhánah (corr. of <em>Pers.</em> “Peshkhánah” = state-tents sent forward on march), <em>tr. here</em> “a hanging,” <a href="#Page_131">131</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Bawwábah, Al = a place where door-keepers meet, a police-station (<em>tr.</em> “guard-house”), <a href="#Page_309">309</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Bayzah (<em>Arab.</em>) = an egg, a testicle, <a href="#Page_360">360</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Bed (on roof) made of carpet or thin mattress strewn upon the stucco flooring of the terrace-roof, <a href="#Page_219">219</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Beef causes dysenteric disease, <a href="#Page_51">51</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Bi,” the particle proper of swearing, <a href="#Page_470">470</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Biirn-milyánah Moyah (with various forms of “Moyah”), <a href="#Page_323">323</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Bi-izá-humá” <em>lit.</em> vis-à-vis to the twain, <a href="#Page_69">69</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Bi-Khátiri-k = Thy will be done (<em>tr.</em> “At thy pleasure”), <a href="#Page_322">322</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Bi-Má al-fasíkh ’alà Akrás al-Jullah” (<em>tr.</em> “Save with foul water upon the disks of dung”), <a href="#Page_292">292</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Bi-sab’a Sikak = <em>lit.</em> “with seven nails” (meaning here posts whereto chains were attached), <a href="#Page_380">380</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Bi-Wujúh al Fániját al-Miláh” (reading “al-Ghániját” in app. with “al-Miláh”), render “the faces of the coquettish, the fair” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_80">80</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Bilám” here = the head-stall of the bridle (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_381">381</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Billáhi,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “by Allah,” <a href="#Page_470">470</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Birkah = a fountain-basin, lake, pond, reservoir (<em>tr.</em> “hole”), <a href="#Page_117">117</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Bi-yarza’ fí Asábí-hi (only instance in MS. where the aorist is preceded by preposition “bi”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_432">432</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Blood-red tears, <a href="#Page_149">149</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Bloody sweat, <a href="#Page_149">149</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Brain-pans (good old classical English), <a href="#Page_219">219</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Breslau Ed. quoted, <a href="#Page_117">117</a>, <a href="#Page_118">118</a>, <a href="#Page_419">419</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Bribing the Kazi’s wife, <a href="#Page_364">364</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Bull-(Taur for Thaur or Saur)—numbered-and-for-battle-day-lengthened” (<em>tr.</em> <em>The Bull-aye-ready-and-for-Battle-aye-steady</em>), <a href="#Page_160">160</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Burd (<em>pl.</em> of Burdah) = mantle or woollen plaid of striped stuff, <a href="#Page_42">42</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Burka = Nosebag, <a href="#Page_91">91</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Búsah (doubtful meaning), possibly reed used as a case or sheath (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_108">108</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“By the life of my youth,” a “swear” peculiarly feminine, and never used by men, <a href="#Page_85">85</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Byron in England, <a href="#Page_274">274</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">“Cafilah” (Shaykh of), for Cafila, <a href="#Page_419">419</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Caliphs under the early Ommiades, <a href="#Page_39">39</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Can play with the egg and the stone,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “can play off equally well the soft-brained and the hard-brained,” <a href="#Page_277">277</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Cap of the “Sútarí” or jester of the Arnaut (Albanian) regiments, <a href="#Page_276">276</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Cap worn by professional buffoon, <a href="#Page_276">276</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Chafariz” (fountain) of Portugal (der. from Sakáríj), <a href="#Page_5">5</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Chavis and Cazotte quoted, <a href="#Page_27">27</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Cheek, he set his right hand upon, meaning he rested his cheek upon his right hand, <a href="#Page_9">9</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Circumcision (Jewish rite) must always be performed by the Mohel, an official of the Synagogue, <a href="#Page_217">217</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— three operations of, <a href="#Page_217">217</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Circumstantial (affecting the), a favourite manœuvre with the Ráwí, <a href="#Page_233">233</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Cistern or tank in terrace-roof of Syrian houses, <a href="#Page_246">246</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Cloud (which contains rain) always typical of liberality and generous dealing, <a href="#Page_179">179</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Coffee and smoking, <a href="#Page_236">236</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Concealments inevitable in ancient tale or novel, <a href="#Page_417">417</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Couplets rhyming in “—ání” and “—álí” not lawful, <a href="#Page_128">128</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Courser, rubbing his cheeks upon his master’s back and shoulders, <a href="#Page_405">405</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Cuddy, <em>der. from Pers.</em> “Kadah” = a room, <a href="#Page_24">24</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Curiosity (playing upon the bride’s) = a favourite topic in Arab. and all Eastern folk-lore, <a href="#Page_443">443</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Dabbah = wooden bolt, <a href="#Page_265">265</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Dahmár (King) called by Scott “Rammaud,” <a href="#Page_105">105</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Dann = Amphora (<em>Gr.</em> <span xml:lang="grc">ἀμφορεύς</span> short for <span xml:lang="grc">ἀμφιφορεύς</span> = having two handles), <em>tr.</em> “two-handed jar,” <a href="#Page_198">198</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Darabukkah-drum (or “tom-tom”), <a href="#Page_13">13</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Darajah = an instant; also a degree (of the Zodiac), <em>tr.</em> “one watch,” <a href="#Page_90">90</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— is also used for any short space of time (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_90">90</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Dár al-Ziyáfah (in Northern Africa) = a kind of caravanserai in which travellers are lodged at Government expense, <a href="#Page_330">330</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Darín” for “Zarín” = what is powdered, collyrium, <a href="#Page_111">111</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Dashísh (<em>Arab.</em>), <em>tr.</em> “flour” (<em>Dicts.</em> make “wheat broth to be sipped”), <a href="#Page_347">347</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— this is a pop. cor. of the class. Jashísh = coarsely ground wheat (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_347">347</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Daylakí = Daylakian (garments), <a href="#Page_143">143</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Dayr Nashshábah = the Monastery of the Archers (a fancy name), <a href="#Page_129">129</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018"><em>Decies repetitæ</em>, forms which go down with an Eastern audience, but intolerable in a Western volume, <a href="#Page_170">170</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Diapedesis” of bloodstained tears frequently mentioned in the “Nights,” <a href="#Page_149">149</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Díním” (religious considerations) of the famous Andalusian Yúsuf Caro (a most fanatical work), <a href="#Page_160">160</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Dive not into the depths unless thou greed for thyself and thy wants,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “tempt not Providence unless compelled so to do by necessity,” <a href="#Page_422">422</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Díwán (<em>Arab.</em>) = Council-chamber, <a href="#Page_227">227</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Díwan = Divan (the “Martabah” when placed on “Mastabah,” etc.), <a href="#Page_68">68</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Doggerel, fit only for coffee-house, <a href="#Page_164">164</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Draw me aside its tail, so that I may inform thee thereanent” (also similar facetia in Mullah Jámí), <a href="#Page_46">46</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Dried fruits, to form the favourite “filling” for lamb and other meats prepared in “Puláo” (Pilaff), <a href="#Page_358">358</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Drowned in her blood” in the text, for “all bleeding” (hyperbole run mad), <a href="#Page_139">139</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Drunkenness (instead of “intoxication”), <a href="#Page_315">315</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Duty of good neighbour, to keep watch and guard from evil, <a href="#Page_285">285</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Eateth on the spittle, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, on an empty stomach, <a href="#Page_51">51</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Embárah (<em>pron.</em> ’Mbárah), <em>pop. for</em> Al-bárihah = the last part of the preceding day or night, yesterday, <a href="#Page_256">256</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Enallage of persons (“third” for “first”—“youth” for “I”), <a href="#Page_468">468</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Exaggeration necessary to impress an Oriental audience, <a href="#Page_139">139</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Fadáwí (<em>Arab.</em>) = a blackguard (<em>tr.</em> “ne’er-do-well”), <a href="#Page_441">441</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Faddah, <em>tr.</em> “groats,” <a href="#Page_226">226</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Faddán (here miswritten “Faddád”) = a plough, a yoke of oxen, <a href="#Page_347">347</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— also the common land-measure of Egypt and Syria, <a href="#Page_347">347</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Fa ghábá thaláthat ayyamin” = an he (or it, the mountain?) disappeared for three days, <a href="#Page_390">390</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— (Dr. Steingass translates), <a href="#Page_390">390</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Fahata (for “Fahasa?”) or, perhaps, <em>cl. error for</em> “Fataha” = he opened (the ground), <em>tr.</em> “choosing a place,” <a href="#Page_353">353</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Fahata (prob. vulgarism for “Fahatha”) (fahasa) = to investigate (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_353">353</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— or may be read “Fataha” and <em>tr.</em> “he recited a ’Fátihah’ for them,” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_353">353</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Fál or omen (taking a), <a href="#Page_424">424</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Farárijí, <em>tr.</em> “Poulterer” (in text, as if the <em>pl.</em> of “Farrúj” = chicken were “Farárij” instead of Faráríj) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_291">291</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Fatáirí = a maker of “Fatírah” pancake (<em>tr.</em> “Pieman”), <a href="#Page_298">298</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Fa tarak-hu Muusí am’à dáir yaltash fí ’l-Tarík” = “hereupon Musa left his companion darkly tramping about,” <a href="#Page_323">323</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— (Dr. Steingass explains and translates), <a href="#Page_323">323</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Fátihah (fem. of “fátih” = an opener, a conqueror), <a href="#Page_460">460</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Fátimah and Halímah = Martha and Mary, <a href="#Page_318">318</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Fatír (<em>for</em> “Fatírah”) = pancake (<em>tr.</em> “scone”), <a href="#Page_321">321</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Feeding captives and prisoners (exception being usually made in cases of brigands, assassins and criminals condemned for felony), <a href="#Page_430">430</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Feeling conception” unknown except in tales, <a href="#Page_124">124</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Fidáwi (also “Fidá’i” and “Fidawíyah”) = pirate-men, <a href="#Page_25">25</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Fighting (the Fellah will use anything in preference to his fists in), <a href="#Page_350">350</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Fí Hayyi-kum Taflatun háma, etc. (“A maiden in your tribe avails my heart with love to fire,” etc.) (Steingass also translates), <a href="#Page_149">149</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Fí ’irzak” (<em>vulg.</em> “arzak”), formula for “I place myself under thy protection” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_220">220</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Fikí (the pop. form of present day for “Fakíh,” <em>prop.</em> “learned in the law”), <em>tr.</em> “tutor” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_420">420</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Fí Kib = “a mat” (Scott), <a href="#Page_214">214</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Fingán (<em>pl.</em> “Fanájíl,” <em>pron.</em> “Fanágil”), and “Filgál” used promiscuously (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_236">236</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Finjál (<em>Arab.</em>), systematically repeated for “Finján” (<em>pron.</em> in Egypt “Fingán”), <a href="#Page_236">236</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">First night (wedding night), <a href="#Page_223">223</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Flfl’a (a scribal error?), may be Filfil = pepper or palm-fibre, <a href="#Page_351">351</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Folk are equal, but in different degrees” (compared with “All men are created equal”), <a href="#Page_425">425</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Food, respect due to (Tale of “Daftardar”), <a href="#Page_86">86</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Formula of the cup and lute, <a href="#Page_196">196</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Full dressed and ornamented” (a girl, lying beneath a slab), a sign of foul play, <a href="#Page_317">317</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Gardener, Egyptian names for (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_293">293</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Gauttier quoted, <a href="#Page_3">3</a>, <a href="#Page_17">17</a>, <a href="#Page_21">21</a>, <a href="#Page_63">63</a>, <a href="#Page_123">123</a>, <a href="#Page_125">125</a>, <a href="#Page_231">231</a>, <a href="#Page_263">263</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ghába = departed (may here mean “passed away”), <a href="#Page_390">390</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ghashím (<em>Arab.</em>) = a “raw lad,” a favourite word in Egypt, <a href="#Page_29">29</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ghaylah, Al- = Siesta-time (Badawi speech), <a href="#Page_151">151</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ghetto, the Jewish quarter (Hárah) which Israelites call “Hazer” = a court-yard, an inclosure, <a href="#Page_217">217</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Ghibtu ’an al-Dunyá” a pop. phrase, <em>tr.</em> “I was estranged from the world” meaning simply “I fainted,” <a href="#Page_97">97</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ghirárah (<em>Arab.</em>) (<em>pl.</em> “Gharáír”) = a sack, <a href="#Page_228">228</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Ghul-who-eateth-man-we-pray-Allah-for-safety” (compound name), <a href="#Page_161">161</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Ghurrát” (<em>Arab.</em>) may be bright looks, charms in general, or “fore-locks” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_88">88</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ghusl, or complete ablution, <a href="#Page_93">93</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Girbahs = water-skins, <a href="#Page_28">28</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Goodwife of Cairo and her four gallants (analogous), <a href="#Page_253">253</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Gouged out the right eye, <a href="#Page_322">322</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Guernsey and Sark folk-lore, <a href="#Page_328">328</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Guide (in Africa), following instead of leading the party, <a href="#Page_388">388</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">“H” (the final aspirate), use of, <a href="#Page_419">419</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Habbah, Al- = grain (for al-Jinnah) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_108">108</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Hábíl” and “Kábíl” (<em>Arab.</em>) equiv. of Abel and Cain, <a href="#Page_56">56</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Hadda ’lláho bayní wa baynakum,” <em>tr.</em> “Allah draw the line between me and you,” <a href="#Page_406">406</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Hajárata ’l-Bahramán (<em>Arab.</em>) carbuncles, <a href="#Page_133">133</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Hajjáj, Al- son of Yúsuf the Thakafí, <a href="#Page_39">39</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Halbún, The Boobies of (tale concerning the), <a href="#Page_273">273</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Hamákah = fury, <a href="#Page_446">446</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Hamám = ruffed pigeon, culver, <a href="#Page_151">151</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Hand (She raised her) heavenwards (not “her hands” after Christian fashion), <a href="#Page_174">174</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Handicraft an it enrich not, still it veileth” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, enables a man to conceal the pressure of impecuniosity, <a href="#Page_223">223</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Hanná-kumú’llah” = Almighty Allah make it pleasant to you, <a href="#Page_69">69</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Haply there will befal thee somewhat contrary to this”—a euphuism meaning some disaster, <a href="#Page_237">237</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Harárah = heat (<em>here der.</em> from “Hurr,” free born), noble, and <em>tr.</em> “nobility,” <a href="#Page_289">289</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Harem, <a href="#Page_283">283</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Harím (women) = the broken pl. of “Hurmah,” from “Haram,” the honour of the house (also an infinitive whose pl. is Harímát = the women of a family), <a href="#Page_283">283</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Hasab wa nasab = degree and descent, <a href="#Page_43">43</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Hasal (for which read Khasal), <em>tr.</em> “gain,” <a href="#Page_425">425</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Hatím (wall) = The “broken” (wall) to the north of Ka’abah, <a href="#Page_180">180</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Haudaj (<em>Arab.</em>) = a camel-litter, <em>tr.</em> “Howdahs,” <a href="#Page_193">193</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Hawálín, cler. error for either “hawálà” = all around, or “Hawálí” = surroundings (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_301">301</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Hawwúlín (<em>Arab.</em>) <em>tr.</em> “over his ears,” (a corrupt passage in text), <a href="#Page_301">301</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Hayfá, Al-, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> “The Slim-waisted,” <a href="#Page_125">125</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Hazár = the nightingale, or bird of a thousand songs, <a href="#Page_151">151</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Hazer = a court-yard, an inclosure, <a href="#Page_217">217</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“He ... who administereth between a man and his heart,” a Koranic phrase (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_42">42</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Heaven, the fifth = the planet Mars, <a href="#Page_119">119</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“He found her a treasure wherefrom the talisman had been loosed,” <a href="#Page_14">14</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Help ye a Moslemah” (in text “Help ye the Moslems”), <a href="#Page_368">368</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Herklots quoted, <a href="#Page_28">28</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Heron quoted, <a href="#Page_27">27</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Hifán (<em>pl.</em> of “Hafnah”) = handful, mouthful (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_11">11</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Hilál = the crescent (waxing or waning) for the first and last two or three nights, <a href="#Page_72">72</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Himà = the private and guarded lands of a Badawi tribe (<em>tr.</em> “demesne”), <a href="#Page_142">142</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Ho! Aloes good for use. Ho! Pepper,” etc., cries of an itinerant pedlar hawking about woman’s wares, <a href="#Page_351">351</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Holy House (youth being of, can deny that he belongs to any place or race), <a href="#Page_39">39</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Hospitality (House of), <a href="#Page_330">330</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Houdas (Professor) quoted, <a href="#Page_47">47</a>, <a href="#Page_48">48</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">House of Háshim, great grandfather to the prophet, <a href="#Page_46">46</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Hudá Sirru-hu, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, his secret sin was guided (by Allah) to the safety of concealment, <em>tr.</em> “his secret was safe-directed,” <a href="#Page_339">339</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— Dr. Steingass reads “Wahadá Sirru-hu” = “and his mind was at rest”, <a href="#Page_339">339</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">“I am an Irání but Walláhi indeed I am not lying” (Persian saying for “I will shun leasing”), <a href="#Page_303">303</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“I will shun leasing,” <a href="#Page_303">303</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ibráa = deliverance from captivity, <a href="#Page_203">203</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ibrahim of Mosul, the far-famed musician, <a href="#Page_193">193</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ihtimám wa Ghullah (former should be written with major <em>h</em>, meaning “fever”), <em>tr.</em> “there befel him much concern,” <a href="#Page_421">421</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Ilà an káta-ka ’l-’amal al-rabíh” (In MS. giving no sense. Translations by Author and Dr. Steingass), <a href="#Page_58">58</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Imr al-Kays (in text “Imriyyu ’l-Kays”) a pre-Islamitic poet (“The man of al-Kays”), <a href="#Page_181">181</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“’Ind ’uzzáti ’s-siníni” (<em>Arab.</em>) = <em>lit.</em> the thorny shrubs of ground bare of pasture, <a href="#Page_59">59</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Inna házih Hurmah lam ’alay-há Shatárah” = “Truly this one is a woman; I must not act vilely or rashly towards her” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_220">220</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Insistance overcometh hindrance” (equiv. of “’Tis dogged as does it” of Charles Darwin), <a href="#Page_171">171</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Intersexual powers, vaunting, <a href="#Page_91">91</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Intihába ’l furas” <em>lit.</em> = the snatching of opportunities (<em>tr.</em> “divest himself in a pleasurable case”), <a href="#Page_222">222</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Intoxication (properly meaning “poisoning”) a term to be left for “teetotallers” to use, <a href="#Page_315">315</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Inverted speech, form of, <a href="#Page_60">60</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Irak, Al-, the head-quarters of the Khárijite heresy, <a href="#Page_213">213</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Irham turham = Pity and shalt be pitied (one of the few passive verbs still used in pop. par.), <a href="#Page_169">169</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“’Irk al-Unsá” (<em>Arab.</em>) = chordæ testiculorum (<em>tr.</em> “testicle-veins”), <a href="#Page_52">52</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“’Irz” (= protection), “Hurmah” and “Shatárah” (words explaining each other mutually) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_220">220</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ishtalaka = he surmised, discovered (a secret), <a href="#Page_33">33</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Islam (Shaykh of), <a href="#Page_317">317</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Isráfíl = Raphael, <a href="#Page_302">302</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Istanáda ’ala Shakkati-h, <em>tr.</em> “(he might) lean against his quarter,” <a href="#Page_401">401</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— “he lay down on his rug” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_401">401</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Istanatú lá-ha” (presupposing “istanattú” 10th form of “natt” = he jumped), <em>tr.</em> “they threw themselves on her neck” (Dr. Steingass takes it for 8th form of “sanat” and translates “listened attentively”), <a href="#Page_34">34</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Istífá = choice, selection, <a href="#Page_203">203</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Istikhráj, Al- = making “elegant extracts,” <a href="#Page_126">126</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Itowwaha,” <em>tr.</em> “throwing his right leg over his back,” <a href="#Page_382">382</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— (Dr. Steingass also explains and translates), <a href="#Page_382">382</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Ja’afar, the model Moslem minister, <a href="#Page_72">72</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Jabal al-Saháb = “The mount of clouds,” <a href="#Page_376">376</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Jady (<em>Arab.</em>) = the zodiacal sign Capricorn (<em>tr.</em> “kid”), <a href="#Page_46">46</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Jahím-hell, <a href="#Page_55">55</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Jahím (Hell), <a href="#Page_201">201</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Jalabí” (in text), afterwards written “Shalabí,” <a href="#Page_335">335</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Janínáti, Al- = the market gardener, <a href="#Page_293">293</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Jannat al-Khuld (<em>Arab.</em>) = the Eternal Garden, <a href="#Page_172">172</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Járiyah rádih, Al-, <em>tr.</em> “the good graces of her mistress,” <a href="#Page_161">161</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Jarrah (<em>Arab.</em>) = flask, <a href="#Page_321">321</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Jay’a, Al- = the onyx (a well-omened stone), <a href="#Page_130">130</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Jazr = cutting, strengthening, flow (of tide), <a href="#Page_203">203</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Jiház (<em>Arab. Egypt.</em> “Gaház”) = marriage portion, <a href="#Page_28">28</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Jílan ba’da Jíl” the latter word = revolutions, change of days, tribe, people, <a href="#Page_476">476</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Jinn-mad (or in Persian “Parí-stricken,”—Smitten by the Fairies), <a href="#Page_249">249</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Jugular veins (esp. the external pair) carry blood to the face, and are subject abnormally to the will, <a href="#Page_340">340</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Jummayz (<em>Arab.</em>) = a tall sycamore tree, <a href="#Page_117">117</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Kababjí (for “Kabábji”), seller of Kabábs (<em>tr.</em> “cook,”), <a href="#Page_225">225</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kabdan (usual form “Kaptan” from <em>Ital.</em> “<span xml:lang="it">Capitano</span>”) = Captain (ship’s) (Turk, form, as in “Kapúdán-pashá” Lord High Admiral of ancient Osmanli-land), <a href="#Page_402">402</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kabsh (<em>Arab.</em>) = ram, <a href="#Page_299">299</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kabút (<em>pl.</em> Kabábít) = “Capotes,” <a href="#Page_274">274</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kadíd, Al- (<em>Arab.</em>) = jerked meat flesh smoked, or sun-dried (<em>tr.</em> “boucan’d meat”), <a href="#Page_51">51</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Káík” and “Káík-jí” the well-known Caïque of the Bosphorus, <a href="#Page_236">236</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Káim-makám = a deputy (governor, etc.), <a href="#Page_281">281</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kála’ l-Ráwi = the reciter saith, <a href="#Page_64">64</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kalím = one who speaks with another, a familiar, <a href="#Page_203">203</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kalímu’llah = Title of Moses, on account of the Oral Law and conversations at Mount Sinai, <a href="#Page_203">203</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kamrah = the chief cabin (from <em>Gr.</em> <span xml:lang="grc">καμάρα</span> = vault), <em>tr.</em> “cuddy,” <a href="#Page_24">24</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kapúdán-pashá = Lord High Admiral of ancient Osmanli-land, <a href="#Page_402">402</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Karawán = crane or curlew (<em>Charadrius ædicnemus</em>), <a href="#Page_151">151</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kárishín = chasing, being in hot pursuit of (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_405">405</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Karm (✓), originally means cutting a slip of skin from the camel’s nose by way of mark, <a href="#Page_266">266</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kasalah = a shock of corn, assemblage of sheaves, <a href="#Page_53">53</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— may be cler. error for “Kasabah” = stalk, haulm, straw, <a href="#Page_53">53</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kas’at (= a wooden platter or bowl) Mafrúkah, <em>tr.</em> “handrubbed flour,” <a href="#Page_349">349</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kashshara = grinned a ghastly smile (also laughing so as to shew the teeth), <a href="#Page_461">461</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Katá = sandgrouse, <a href="#Page_151">151</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Kata’ al-arba’,” or cutting off the four members, equiv. to our “quartering,” <a href="#Page_96">96</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kata’a Judúr-há (for “hú”), <em>tr.</em> “backbone,” <a href="#Page_353">353</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— (Dr. Steingass refers pronoun in “Judúr-há” <em>tr.</em> “Rakabah,” taking the “roots of the neck,” <em>tr.</em> = spine), <a href="#Page_353">353</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kawá’ib, Al- = High-breasted (also P. N. of the river), <a href="#Page_176">176</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kawá’ib, Al- (a name unknown to author); <em>lit.</em> meaning “of high-breasted virgins,” <a href="#Page_129">129</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kázánát Al- (<em>pl.</em> of Kázán) = chauldrons (<em>Turk.</em> “Kazghán”), (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_25">25</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kazánát, (<em>pl.</em> of “Kázán”) = crucibles (opp. to Kawálib = moulds), <a href="#Page_108">108</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kází al-Askar = the great legal authority of a country (<em>tr.</em> “Kazi of the Army”), <a href="#Page_310">310</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kbb (possibly “Kubb” for “Kubbah”) = a vault, a cupola, <a href="#Page_376">376</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— (Dr. Steingass also explains and translates), <a href="#Page_376">376</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Khálat-kí insánun (<em>Arab.</em>), <em>tr.</em> “(some man) has mixed with thee”; meaning also “to lie with,” <a href="#Page_398">398</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Khálata-há al-Khajal wa ’l-Hayá = shame and abasement mixed with her, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “suffused or overwhelmed her” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_399">399</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Khalífah (never written “Khalíf”) = a viceregent or vicar, <a href="#Page_64">64</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Khallí-ná nak’ud (<em>Arab.</em>) = let us sit together (a thoroughly modern expression) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_475">475</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Khams Ghaffár = “five pardoners” (Steingass reads Khamr (= wine) ’ukár another name for wine, as in “Al-Khamr al-’ukár” = choice wine), <a href="#Page_137">137</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kharrat (in text) = tripping and stumbling (in her haste), <a href="#Page_253">253</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— (also may be meant for “Kharajat” = “she went out),” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_253">253</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Khátá = Cathay = China, <a href="#Page_27">27</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Khazíb-dye; 200.</li>
				<li class="c018">Khaznah (Khazínah) or 10,000 Kís each = £5, <a href="#Page_236">236</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Khaznat al-Síláh (<em>Arab.</em>) = the ship’s armoury, <a href="#Page_403">403</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Khil’at = robe of honour, <a href="#Page_410">410</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Khimár (<em>Arab.</em>) = head-veil (a covering for the back of the head), <a href="#Page_255">255</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Khizr = the Green Prophet, <a href="#Page_301">301</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kíb (<em>pl.</em> “Kiyáb” and “Akyáb”) = a small thick mat used to produce shade (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_215">215</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kirsh = piastre, <a href="#Page_226">226</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Kisrat al-yábisah ’ala ’l-Rík, etc.” = a slice of dry bread on the spittle, for it absorbs ... phlegm on the mouth of the stomach (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_51">51</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Kohl’d her eyes,” <a href="#Page_292">292</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kohl-powder, <a href="#Page_292">292</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Koran quoted, <a href="#Page_44">44</a>, <a href="#Page_47">47</a>, <a href="#Page_48">48</a>, <a href="#Page_49">49</a>, <a href="#Page_50">50</a>, <a href="#Page_56">56</a>, <a href="#Page_58">58</a>, <a href="#Page_180">180</a>, <a href="#Page_460">460</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kuláh meant for “Kuláh” a Dervish’s cap (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_108">108</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kumrí = turtle-dove, <a href="#Page_151">151</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kurúd = apes (occurring as a rhyme twice in three couplets), <a href="#Page_190">190</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Kutb (Al-) al-Ghauth (<em>Arab.</em>) = <em>lit.</em> “The pole star of invocation for help” (<em>tr.</em> “Prince of the Hallows”) the highest degree of sanctity in the mystic fraternity of Tasawwuf, <a href="#Page_426">426</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">“Lá Haul of Allah is upon thee,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, it is a time when men should cry for thy case, <a href="#Page_359">359</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Lá Haula = there is no Majesty, etc., <a href="#Page_359">359</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Lá khuzibat Ayday al-Firák,” meaning, “May Separation never ornament herself in sign of gladness at the prospect of our parting,” <a href="#Page_200">200</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Laban, pop. word for milk artificially soured, <a href="#Page_352">352</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Laban halíb (a trivial form) = sweet milk, <a href="#Page_352">352</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">La’bat Shawáribu-hu = <em>lit.</em> “his mustachios played” (<em>tr.</em> “curled”), <a href="#Page_273">273</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">La-hu Diráah (for Diráyah = prudence) fí tadbírí ’l-mulúk = <em>tr.</em> “Also he had controul,” <a href="#Page_465">465</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Lá iláha illa ’llah,” the refrain of Unity, <a href="#Page_403">403</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Lakasha = be conversed with, <a href="#Page_285">285</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— one of the words called “Zidd,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, with opposite meanings, <a href="#Page_285">285</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Laklaka-há (<em>Arab.</em>), an onomatopœia, <a href="#Page_265">265</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Lam yakthir Khayrak”; this phrase (<em>pron.</em> “Kattir Khayrak”) is the Egypt. and Moslem equiv. for our “thank you,” <a href="#Page_60">60</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Lam yanúb al-Wáhidu min-hum nisf haffán,” <em>tr.</em> “each took his turn thereat and drank without drinking his full,” <a href="#Page_11">11</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— Dr. Steingass explains and translates “And none took his turn without sipping a few laps,” <a href="#Page_11">11</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Lane quoted, <a href="#Page_28">28</a>, <a href="#Page_86">86</a>, <a href="#Page_90">90</a>, <a href="#Page_97">97</a>, <a href="#Page_226">226</a>, <a href="#Page_265">265</a>, <a href="#Page_291">291</a>, <a href="#Page_351">351</a>, <a href="#Page_363">363</a>, <a href="#Page_426">426</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Learn from thyself what is thy Lord (Sufi language) = in <em>Gr.</em> <span xml:lang="grc">γνῶθι σεαυτόν</span> and corresponding with our “looking up through nature to nature’s God,” <a href="#Page_276">276</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Lijám (Al-) w’al-Bílám = the latter being a Tábi’ or dependent word used only for a jingle, <a href="#Page_381">381</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Litám = the mouth-band for man (<em>tr.</em> “Litham”), <a href="#Page_139">139</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Look-at-me-and-thou-shalt-know-me” (compound name), <a href="#Page_276">276</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Lovers dressing themselves up and playing the game of mutual admiration, <a href="#Page_153">153</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Lovers of Al-Hayfá and Yúsuf (note concerning), <a href="#Page_123">123</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Lute, beautiful song of the, <a href="#Page_152">152</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Lukmah (<em>Arab.</em>) = a balled mouthful (<em>tr.</em> “morsels”), <a href="#Page_264">264</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Luss,” is after a fashion <span xml:lang="grc">λῃστής</span> (the Greek word however includes piracy while the Arab term is mostly applied to petty larcenists), <a href="#Page_337">337</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Má al-Fasíkh = water of salt-fish (<em>tr.</em> “dirty brine”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_292">292</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Madínat al-Andalús = City of Andalús, (usually Seville), <a href="#Page_402">402</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Madínat al-Nabi,” City of the Prophet, and vulg. Al-Madínah <em>the</em> City, <a href="#Page_43">43</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mad’úr, here translated (even if thou hadst been) an “invited guest,” <a href="#Page_41">41</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— it may also be a synonym and be rendered “as though thou wert a boor or clown” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_41">41</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Máfrúkah (an improvement upon the Fatírah), a favourite dish with the Badawi (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_349">349</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Maghbún <em>usually</em> = deceived, cajoled, <a href="#Page_366">366</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Maghrib = set of sun, <a href="#Page_151">151</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Maháshim (<em>acc.</em> to Bocthor, is a <em>pl.</em> without a singular, meaning “les parties de la génération”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_359">359</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Maháshima-k = good works, merits (in a secondary sense, beard, mustachios), <em>tr.</em> here “yard,” <a href="#Page_359">359</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mahkamah (Place of Judgment) or Kazi’s Court at Cairo, mostly occupied with matrimonial disputes, <a href="#Page_363">363</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mahr = dowry, settled by the husband upon the wife, <a href="#Page_28">28</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Májúr, Al- (<em>Arab.</em>) for “Maajúr” = a vessel, an utensil, <a href="#Page_291">291</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mál (in text), <em>tr.</em> “coin” (also applied to “hidden treasure” amongst Badawin), <a href="#Page_313">313</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mameluke (like unto a), <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, well fed, sturdy, bonny, <a href="#Page_472">472</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ma ’múrah (<em>Arab.</em>) = haunted, <a href="#Page_118">118</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mandíl (kerchief) used by women “on the loose” in default of water to wipe away results of car. cop., <a href="#Page_94">94</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Man of Al-kays, the (pre-Islamitic poet), <a href="#Page_181">181</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Manná’ = a refuser, a forbidder, <a href="#Page_185">185</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Markab mausúkah (from ✓ “Wask” = conceiving, being pregnant), <a href="#Page_474">474</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— <em>tr.</em> “a vessel in cargo and about to set sail,” <a href="#Page_474">474</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Marham al-akbar, Al-” (<em>Arab.</em>) = the greater salve, <a href="#Page_51">51</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Marriage portion, <a href="#Page_28">28</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Martabah” = a mattress, placed upon “Mastabah” (bench) or upon its “Sarír” (framework of jaríd or midribs of the palm) becomes the “Díwan” = Divan, <a href="#Page_68">68</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Martabat Saltanah (for “Sultániyah”) which may mean a royal Divan, <a href="#Page_68">68</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Martha and Mary (Fátimah and Halímah), <a href="#Page_318">318</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Masbúbah, <em>tr.</em> “Cakes,” <a href="#Page_347">347</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mayzah (<em>Arab.</em>) = the large hall with a central fountain for ablution attached to every great mosque (<em>tr.</em> “lavatory”), <a href="#Page_458">458</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mazbúh = slaughtered for good, <a href="#Page_159">159</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Medicine-man (Israelite) always a favorite amongst Moslems and Christians, <a href="#Page_160">160</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mezzízah = applying styptics to the wound (third operation of circumcision), <a href="#Page_217">217</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Miftáh (prop. “Miftah”) = key used throughout the Moslem East, <a href="#Page_265">265</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mihrján, Al- (a P.N. not to be confounded with Maháráj = Great Rajah), <a href="#Page_123">123</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mihtár, also may mean superintendent, head equerry, chief of military band (<span class="sc">St.</span>) (<em>here tr.</em> “Shaykh of the Pipers”), <a href="#Page_298">298</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mihtár (in text) = a prince, a sweeper, a scavenger, <a href="#Page_298">298</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Milah = the cut (first operation of circumcision), <a href="#Page_217">217</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Mí’lakat” (pop. cor. for Mil’akat) al-Hilál “may be the spoon or hollow part of an ear-picker” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_108">108</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Min ba’ada-hu (making Jesus of later date than Imr al-Kays), <a href="#Page_199">199</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Min ghayr Wa’ad = without appointment (<em>tr.</em> “casually”), <a href="#Page_373">373</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Min Hakk la-hu Asl an ’and-ná huná Rájil,” a thoroughly popular phrase = “Of a truth hath any right or reason to say that here in this house is a man?” 247.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— (Dr. Steingass explains and translates), <a href="#Page_247">247</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Min kuddám-ak” (meaning doubtful), <a href="#Page_113">113</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— perhaps it means “from before thee,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, in thy presence (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_113">113</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Misla’l-Kalám” (? a cler. error for “misla’l-Kiláb”) = as the dogs do (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_282">282</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Misla ’l-Khárúf (for “Kharúf”) a common phrase for an innocent, a half idiot, <a href="#Page_283">283</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Misri” here = local name (in India applied exclusively to sugar candy), <a href="#Page_352">352</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Mithkála Zarratin” (translations by Author, Rodwell, Houdas and Steingass), <a href="#Page_48">48</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mohsin = <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, one who does good, a benefactor, <a href="#Page_321">321</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mother of our Harím = my wife, <a href="#Page_283">283</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mouse, passing over food, makes it impure for a religious Moslem to eat, <a href="#Page_239">239</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Moyah (in text), or as Fellah of Egypt says “Mayyeh,” or the Cairenne “Mayya” and other forms, <a href="#Page_323">323</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mubdi’ = the beginner, the originator, <a href="#Page_196">196</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mubtalí, Al- = sores (leprous), <a href="#Page_301">301</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mudáwi, Al- = the man of the people who deals in simples, etc. (as opposed to scientific practitioner), <a href="#Page_326">326</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Muhibbattu (Al-), <em>fem</em> or “Muhibb” lover (in Tasawwuf particularly = “lover of God”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_393">393</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Muhjat al-kulúb = “Core” or “Life-blood of hearts,” <a href="#Page_201">201</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Muhkaman,” a word never found in the Koran, <a href="#Page_47">47</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mukaddam (<em>Anglo-Indicè</em> “Mucuddum”) = overseer, <a href="#Page_310">310</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Mukawwamína (Al-) wa Arbábu ’l Aklam,” the latter usually meaning “scribes skilled in the arts of caligraphy,” <a href="#Page_374">374</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mukh, <em>lit.</em> = brain, marrow (<em>tr.</em> “dimple”), <a href="#Page_86">86</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Munawwarah, Al- = the enlightened, <a href="#Page_43">43</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Músà wa Múzí = Músà the Malignant (Múzí = vexatious, troublesome), <a href="#Page_321">321</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— (Dr. Steingass reads Muusí, the malignant, the malefactor), <a href="#Page_321">321</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Muslimína, here the reg. <em>pl.</em> of “Muslim” = a True Believer, <a href="#Page_367">367</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Musulmán (our “Mussalman,” too often made <em>pl.</em> by “Mussalmen”) is corrupted Arab. used in Persia, Turkey, etc., <a href="#Page_367">367</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mustafà = the Chosen Prophet, Mohammed, <a href="#Page_203">203</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mustafà bin Ism’aíl (began life as apprentice to a barber and rose to high dignity), <a href="#Page_110">110</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Mutalaththimín” = races in North Africa whose males wear the face-swathe (“Lithám”) of cloth, <a href="#Page_139">139</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mutátí be zahri-h (<em>Arab.</em>) = “hanging an arse,” <a href="#Page_459">459</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mutawassí ... al-Wisáyat al-támmah (Wisáyat is corr. noun) = he charged himself with her complete charge, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, maintenance (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_474">474</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mu’izz bi Díni’llah, Al- (first Fatimite Caliph raised to throne of Egypt), tale of, <a href="#Page_43">43</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Mysteries of marriage-night but lightly touched on, because the bride had lost her virginity, <a href="#Page_417">417</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Naakhaz bi-lissati-him (in text), <em>tr.</em> “until I catch them in their robbery” (see under “Luss”), <a href="#Page_337">337</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— (Dr. Steingass reads “Balsata-hum” = until I have received their “ransom”), <a href="#Page_337">337</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Nabbút = a quarter-staff, opp. to the “Dabbús” or club-stick of the Badawin, etc., <a href="#Page_250">250</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Náfishah = <em>Pers.</em> “Náfah” der. from the ✓ “naf” = belly or testicle (the part in the musk-deer supposed to store the perfume), <a href="#Page_207">207</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Nahawand, “Nahávand” the site in Al-Irak where the Persians sustained their final defeat at the hands of the Arabs (A. H. 21), <a href="#Page_209">209</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— also one of many musical measures (like the Ispaháni, the Rásti, etc.), <a href="#Page_209">209</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Na’ím = “the Delight” (also a P. N. of one of the Heavens), <a href="#Page_199">199</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Na’íman = may it be pleasurable to thee (said by barber after operation), <a href="#Page_106">106</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Nás malmúmín = assembled men, a crowd of people (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_253">253</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Nasím = the Zephyr, or the cool north breeze of Upper Arabia, <a href="#Page_197">197</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Nassafa = <span xml:lang="la">libavit, delibavit, etc.</span> (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_11">11</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Natar (watching) for “Nataf” (indigestion, disgust), <a href="#Page_63">63</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Natawású sawíyah = Solace ourselves with converse, <a href="#Page_395">395</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— (cler. error for “Natawánású Shuwayyah” = “let us divert ourselves a little”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_395">395</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Naubah, <em>lit.</em> = a period, keeping guard (here a band of pipes and drums playing at certain periods), <a href="#Page_299">299</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Navel-string, treatment of, <a href="#Page_411">411</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Nayízátí (<em>Arab.</em> afterwards “Nuwayzátí” and lastly “Rayhání”) = a man who vends sweet and savoury herbs (<em>tr.</em> “Herbalist”), <a href="#Page_298">298</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Nisf ra’as sukkar Misri, <em>tr.</em> “half a loaf of Egyptian sugar,” <a href="#Page_352">352</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Niyat” (or intention) not pure, cause of King’s failure, <a href="#Page_111">111</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“None misses a slice from a cut loaf,” <a href="#Page_393">393</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Nuwájira ’l-wukúfát = Settlement of bequeathal, <a href="#Page_467">467</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— (Steingass reads “nuwájiru (for “nuájiru”) ’l-wakúfát” and translates “letting for hire such parts of my property as were inalienable”), <a href="#Page_467">467</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Nuzhat al-Zaman = “Delight of the age,” <a href="#Page_180">180</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">“Of which a description will follow in its place,” a regular formula of the Ráwí, or professional reciter, <a href="#Page_131">131</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“O man, O miserablest of men, O thou disappointed,” etc., characteristic words of abuse, <a href="#Page_359">359</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Open the spittle” = to break the fast, <a href="#Page_51">51</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“O worshipper of Allah,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “O Moslem, opposed to enemy of Allah” = a non-Moslem, <a href="#Page_460">460</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Padding introduced to fill up the “Night,” <a href="#Page_460">460</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Payne quoted, <a href="#Page_55">55</a>, <a href="#Page_69">69</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Pear-tree, not found in Badawi-land, <a href="#Page_117">117</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Pennyroyal (here mere “shot”; the orig. has “Baítharán”), <a href="#Page_458">458</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Perspired in her petticoat trowsers (a physical sign of delight in beauty, usually attributed to old women), <a href="#Page_142">142</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Pertinence (in couplets) not a <i><span xml:lang="la">sine quâ non</span></i> amongst Arabs, <a href="#Page_135">135</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Pigeon blood, used to resemble the results of a bursten hymen, <a href="#Page_29">29</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Pilgrimage quoted, <a href="#Page_43">43</a>, <a href="#Page_180">180</a>, <a href="#Page_214">214</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Practical joking, a dangerous form of fun, as much affected by Egyptians as Hibernians, <a href="#Page_455">455</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Precious stones, Arab, superstitions concerning, <a href="#Page_130">130</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Pretext for murdering an enemy to his faith (Jewish), an idea prevalent in Eastern world, utterly wrong, <a href="#Page_214">214</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Pretty Fanny’s ways” amongst Moslems, <a href="#Page_85">85</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Priah = tearing the foreskin (second operation of circumcision), <a href="#Page_217">217</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Prison had seven doors (to indicate its formidable strength), <a href="#Page_233">233</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Prisoners expected to feed themselves in Moslem lands, <a href="#Page_338">338</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Public gaol = here the Head Policeman’s house. In mod. times it is part of the wall in Governor’s palace, <a href="#Page_337">337</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Raas Sukkar = Loaf-sugar, <a href="#Page_352">352</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Radáh (a form of “Rádih”) = “the large-hipped,” <a href="#Page_198">198</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Radíf or back-rider, common in Arabia, <a href="#Page_162">162</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Rádih, a P.N. (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_161">161</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Rafaka (and “Zafaka”) = took their pleasure, <a href="#Page_282">282</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ra’ís (<em>fem.</em> Ra’ísah) the captain, the skipper (not the owner), <a href="#Page_22">22</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Raisins, an efficacious “pick-me-up,” <a href="#Page_51">51</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Rajul ikhtiyár, <em>tr.</em> “a man of a certain age” (polite term for old man), <a href="#Page_402">402</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Rajul khuzari (<em>Arab.</em>) = a green-meat man (<em>tr.</em> “costermonger”), <a href="#Page_291">291</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Rajul Khwájá = Gentleman, <a href="#Page_254">254</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Rákiba-há”; the technical term for demoniac possession, <a href="#Page_326">326</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ramaha bi-h = bolted, <a href="#Page_382">382</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Rankah or “Ranakah” prob. for “Raunakah,” which usually means “troubled” (speaking of water) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_66">66</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ram’s mutton preferred in wilder tribes of the East, because it gives the teeth more to do, <a href="#Page_299">299</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Rashákah, Al- (<em>Arab.</em>), a word not found in common lexicons, said to be a fork with three prongs, here probably a hat stand (<em>tr.</em> “peg”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_244">244</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Revetment of old wells in Arabia, mostly of dry masonry, <a href="#Page_132">132</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Rent his robes (usually a sign of quiet, here a mark of strong excitement), <a href="#Page_71">71</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Rheumatism, a common complaint in even the hottest climates, <a href="#Page_160">160</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ríh = Wind, gust (of temper), pride, rage, <a href="#Page_58">58</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Rodwell quoted, <a href="#Page_42">42</a>, <a href="#Page_48">48</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Rose up and sat down,” a sign of agitation, <a href="#Page_328">328</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Russians (Asiatics have a very contemptible opinion of the), <a href="#Page_119">119</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Sá’ah = the German <i><span xml:lang="de">Stunde</span></i>, our old “Stound” (meaning to Moslems the spaces between prayer times), <a href="#Page_151">151</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Sabbal ’alayhim (for ’alayhinna, the usual masc. <em>pro fem.</em>) Al-Sattár” (<em>Arab.</em>) = <em>lit.</em> “the Veiler let down a curtain upon them,” <a href="#Page_276">276</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sabt = Sabbath, Saturday, <a href="#Page_228">228</a>, <a href="#Page_324">324</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sádah (Al-) wa al-Khatáyát <em>tr.</em> “various colors both plain and striped,” <a href="#Page_223">223</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Sáhib al-Hayát” = astronomer (may also = a physiognomist), <a href="#Page_289">289</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sahl, <em>meaning</em> “the easy-tempered” (Scott writes “Sohul”), <a href="#Page_138">138</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sahríj = Cistern, <a href="#Page_5">5</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sakf (flat roof), must have a parapet (a Jewish precaution neglected by Al-Islam), <a href="#Page_219">219</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sakhtúr (<em>Arab.</em>) for “Shakhtúr” <em>tr.</em> “batel,” <a href="#Page_163">163</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sakk (<em>pl.</em> “Sikák” and “Sukúk”) = “nail” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_380">380</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Salaku-hu wa nashalú-hu = “they scored it,” <a href="#Page_395">395</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Salkh (<em>Arab.</em>) = flay (meaning also a peculiar form of circumcision), <a href="#Page_214">214</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Salt rubbed on wounds to staunch the blood, <a href="#Page_97">97</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Samár (<em>Arab.</em>) from <em>Pers.</em> “Sumar” = a reed, a rush, <a href="#Page_226">226</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Samm Sá’ah (in text), <em>tr.</em> “poison of the hour,” <a href="#Page_352">352</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sammán = quail, <a href="#Page_151">151</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sapídaj (corresponding with “Isfidaj”), <em>tr.</em> “ceruse” or white lead, <a href="#Page_130">130</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sára la-hu Shanán, <em>tr.</em> “In his new degree he was feared,” <a href="#Page_472">472</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— (Steingass reads “Thániyan” = and he became second to him (the Sultan), <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, his alter ego), <a href="#Page_472">472</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sára yuráshí-h, <em>tr.</em> “kindness and liberality,” <a href="#Page_473">473</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— “Yuráshí” and “Yuráshú” are the 6th form of “rashá, yarshú” = he bestowed a gift (principally for the sake of bribery), he treated kindly (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_473">473</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sar’a’l-Lijám, <em>tr.</em> “bridle thongs,” <a href="#Page_385">385</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Sárayah” (for “Saráyah,” Serai, Government House), <em>tr.</em> “Palace,” <a href="#Page_6">6</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sardáb = a souterrain, <a href="#Page_117">117</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sarmújah (<em>Arab.</em>) from <em>Pers.</em> “Sar-múzah,” a kind of hose or gaiter worn over a boot (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_217">217</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sarmújah (<em>Arab.</em>) = sandals, slippers, etc., <a href="#Page_442">442</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sarsarah (cler. error for “Akhaza (?) surratan”) = he took a purse, <a href="#Page_412">412</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— Sarra Surrah (Surratan) = he tied up a purse (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_412">412</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sawábi (a regularly formed broken plural of a singular “Sábi’” = the pointing one) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_419">419</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sayf kunúzí = a talismanic scymitar (<em>tr.</em> “magical sword”), <a href="#Page_426">426</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sayfu (Al-) w’-al Kalanj = scymitar and dagger, <a href="#Page_381">381</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sayyid (descendant of Hasan) and the Sharíf (der. from Husayn) = difference between, <a href="#Page_39">39</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Scott quoted, <a href="#Page_3">3</a>, <a href="#Page_17">17</a>, <a href="#Page_21">21</a>, <a href="#Page_22">22</a>, <i><span xml:lang="la">ib.</span></i> 24, <a href="#Page_30">30</a>, <a href="#Page_36">36</a>, <a href="#Page_39">39</a>, <a href="#Page_44">44</a>, <a href="#Page_50">50</a>, <a href="#Page_63">63</a>, <a href="#Page_65">65</a>, <a href="#Page_105">105</a>, <a href="#Page_114">114</a>, <a href="#Page_116">116</a>, <a href="#Page_119">119</a>, <a href="#Page_120">120</a>, <a href="#Page_123">123</a>, <a href="#Page_125">125</a>, <a href="#Page_138">138</a>, <a href="#Page_153">153</a>, <a href="#Page_184">184</a>, <a href="#Page_210">210</a>, <a href="#Page_213">213</a>, <a href="#Page_214">214</a>, <a href="#Page_227">227</a>, <a href="#Page_231">231</a>, <a href="#Page_253">253</a>, <a href="#Page_263">263</a>, <a href="#Page_273">273</a>, <a href="#Page_321">321</a>, <a href="#Page_335">335</a>, <a href="#Page_347">347</a>, <a href="#Page_357">357</a>, <a href="#Page_465">465</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sentiment, morbid and unmasculine French, contrasted with the healthy and manly tone of the Nights, <a href="#Page_267">267</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Seven ages of womankind, <a href="#Page_56">56</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sha’abán (his face gladdening as the crescent moon of), <a href="#Page_142">142</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Shabaytar = the Shuhrúr (in MS. Suhrúr) = a blackbird, <a href="#Page_151">151</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— also called “Samaytar” and “Abu al-Ayzar” = the father of the brisk one (a long-necked bird like heron) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_151">151</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sháhbandar = King of the port, a harbour-master, <a href="#Page_254">254</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Shá’il, copyist’s error for “Shághil,” act. part of Shughl = business affairs, <a href="#Page_245">245</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— Here probably for the fuller “Shughl shághil” = an urgent business, (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_245">245</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Shakhat, or modern word, <em>tr.</em> here “revile” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Shakhs = carven image, <a href="#Page_30">30</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Shakk (<em>Arab.</em>) = splitting or quartering, <a href="#Page_96">96</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Shaklaba, here = “shakala” = he weighed out (money), he had to do with a woman (<em>tr.</em> “tumbled”), <a href="#Page_291">291</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Shalabí = a dandy, a macaroni (from the Turk. Chelebi), <a href="#Page_243">243</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Shame (uncovered my), in this instance “head and face,” <a href="#Page_329">329</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Shásh = a small compact white turband, and distinctive sign of the true Believer, <a href="#Page_143">143</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Shashmah (from <em>Pers.</em> “Chashmah” = a fountain) <em>tr.</em> “privies,” <a href="#Page_458">458</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Shatárah, signifying vileness and rashness (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_220">220</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Shawwara binta-hu = he gave a marriage outfit to his daughter (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_28">28</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Shaykh of Islam, <a href="#Page_317">317</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Shi’ah doctrine, <a href="#Page_178">178</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ship’s crew ran on shore on their own business immediately the vessel cast anchor, <a href="#Page_475">475</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Shooting shafts and firing bullets at the butt, practised by Easterns on horseback, <a href="#Page_421">421</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Shuhrúr al-kanísah” = the blackbird of the Church (Christians in Syria call St. Paul, on account of his eloquence), (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_151">151</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Shúwár (<em>Arab.</em>) = trousseau (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_28">28</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Signet-ring made of carnelian, <a href="#Page_52">52</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Signet-ring of kingship (important sign of sovereignty), <a href="#Page_112">112</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sikkah (<em>pl.</em> Sikak) = (amongst other meanings) “an iron post or stake” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_380">380</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Simá’a <em>lit.</em> hearing, applied idiomatically to the ecstasy of Darwayshes when listening to esoteric poetry, <a href="#Page_151">151</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sín, Al- (in text) = China (here “Al-Sind”), <a href="#Page_194">194</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Sind revisited” quoted, <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sind (so-called from Sindhu, the Indus, <em>Pers.</em> “Sindáb”), <a href="#Page_3">3</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Sirru ’l-iláhi,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, the soul which is “divinæ particula auræ” (<em>tr.</em> “Divine mystery”), <a href="#Page_466">466</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sirt’anta = thou hast become (for Sirtu ana = I have become), <a href="#Page_86">86</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Sitt-há” (<em>Arab.</em>), <em>tr.</em> “Mistress” (Mauritanians prefers “Sídah” and Arabian Arabs “Kabírah” = the first lady, <i><span xml:lang="fr">Madame Mère</span></i>), <a href="#Page_364">364</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Slaves, when useless, made to “walk a plank” or tossed into the sea, <a href="#Page_405">405</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Sleep with both feet in one stocking” (Irish saying for “Have a care of thyself”), <a href="#Page_442">442</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Smoking and coffee, <a href="#Page_236">236</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Solaced himself by gazing upon the trees and waters,” a feeling well known to the traveller, <a href="#Page_390">390</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Spreading (the mats, mattresses, rugs, etc., of well-to-do Eastern lodging), <a href="#Page_233">233</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Stick wherewith he tapped and drew lines in absent fashion on the ground,” <a href="#Page_10">10</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Stomach has two mouths, œsophagic above and pyloric below, <a href="#Page_52">52</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Stone tied in kerchief or rag, weapon for fighting, <a href="#Page_350">350</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Story-telling, servile work, <a href="#Page_34">34</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">St. Paul, called by the Christians in Syria “Shuhrúr al-Kanísah,” the blackbird of the Church (on account of his eloquence) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_151">151</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Subaudi” = “that hath not been pierced” (a virgin), <a href="#Page_223">223</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sugar (Europe-made white) avoided by Moslems as unlawful, <a href="#Page_352">352</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sugar (Sukkar), <a href="#Page_352">352</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sujjádah, <em>tr.</em> “prayer-rug,” <a href="#Page_225">225</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sukkar (from <em>Pers.</em> “Shakkar,” whence Lat. Saccharum), the generic term, <a href="#Page_352">352</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Sunnah = the practice, etc., of the Prophet, <a href="#Page_193">193</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Supernatural agency makes the most satisfactory version of tale, <a href="#Page_118">118</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Surúr = Joy, contentment, <a href="#Page_200">200</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Su’ubán (<em>Arab.</em>) = cockatrice (<em>tr.</em> “Basilisk”), <a href="#Page_427">427</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Syria, city of (“the stubbornest of places and the feeblest of races”), <a href="#Page_41">41</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Syrian and three women of Cairo” (Variants), <a href="#Page_273">273</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Ta’ayyun = influence (especially by the “’Ayn” (evil) Eye), <em>tr.</em> “fascinate,” <a href="#Page_166">166</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Taawíl = the commentary or explanation of Moslem Holy Writ, <a href="#Page_43">43</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Tabíb, Al- = the scientific practitioner (in pop. parlance), <a href="#Page_326">326</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Tá-Há = the Koranic chapter No. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span> revealed at Meccah, <a href="#Page_180">180</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Tahlíl” = making word or deed canonically lawful, <a href="#Page_43">43</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Tahrím = rendering any action “harám” or unlawful, <a href="#Page_43">43</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Taí, Al- (relative adjective of irregular formation), <a href="#Page_46">46</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Tá’il al-Wasf = “Drawer-out of Descriptions,” <a href="#Page_185">185</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Tajrís, rendered by a circumlocution “Bell,” <a href="#Page_337">337</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Takbír and Tahlíl, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, Crying the war-cry, “Alláho Akbar” = “God is most Great,” and “Lá iláha illa ’llah” the refrain of Unity, <a href="#Page_403">403</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Takhsa-u, <em>tr.</em> “baffled,” a curious word of venerable age (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_44">44</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Takht Raml = table of sand, geomantic table, <a href="#Page_153">153</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Tale of Simpleton Husband (W. M. Version), <a href="#Page_116">116</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Tanzíl = coming down, revelation of the Koran, <a href="#Page_43">43</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Tarajjama = he deprecated, <a href="#Page_12">12</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Tartara (<em>Arab.</em>), <em>tr.</em> “perked up” (prob. an emphatic reduplication of Tarra = “sprouting, pushing forward),” <a href="#Page_443">443</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Tasawwuf (mystic fraternity of), <a href="#Page_426">426</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Tasht = “basin” (the consonantic outline being the same as of “tashshat” = she was raining, sprinkling) a possible pun, (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_147">147</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Tastaghís (<em>Arab.</em>) = <em>lit.</em> crying out “Wa Ghausáh!”—“Ho to my aid” (<em>tr.</em> “Help! Help!”), <a href="#Page_157">157</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Tauhán al-Husán, <em>tr.</em> “lost in the waste,” <a href="#Page_409">409</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Tawánís (instead of “Tawánis,” <em>pl.</em> of Taunas), <em>tr.</em> “Cordage” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_133">133</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Tayhál (<em>pl.</em> “Tawáhil”) for the usual “Tihál” = spleen (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_53">53</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Tayyibah = the good, sweet or lawful, <a href="#Page_43">43</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Tazaghzagha, <em>gen.</em> = he spoke hesitatingly, he scoffed (<em>tr.</em> “waxed wroth,”) 106.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Tazaghghara fíhi” (rendered pop.) “he pitched into him” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_106">106</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Tazarghít (error for “Zaghrítah”) = the cry of joy, <a href="#Page_429">429</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— (numerous forms of) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_430">430</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Ten camel loads” about a ton, at the smallest computation of 200 lbs. to each beast, <a href="#Page_395">395</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ter-il-bas (Tayr Táús?), a kind of peacock, made to determine elections by alighting on the head of a candidate, <a href="#Page_26">26</a>, <a href="#Page_27">27</a>. (Old Translation.)</li>
				<li class="c018">Time, division of, in China and Japan, <a href="#Page_90">90</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Tirrea Bede” (Night 655) note concerning, <a href="#Page_119">119</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Tisht (a basin for the ewer), <em>tr.</em> “tray,” <a href="#Page_428">428</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Thakálah (<em>Arab.</em>) = heaviness, dulness, stupidity (<em>tr.</em> “horseplay”), <a href="#Page_457">457</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Them” for “her” (often occurrence of), <a href="#Page_178">178</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">This matter is not far to us = “is not beyond our reach,” <a href="#Page_311">311</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Thou hast been absent overlong,” a kindly phrase pop. addressed to the returning traveller, <a href="#Page_444">444</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Thy rose-hued cheek showeth writ new-writ,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, the growing beard and whisker is compared with black letters on a white ground, <a href="#Page_148">148</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">T Kh DH (= takhuz-hu, according to author); may be either 2nd or 8th form of “ahad,” in the sense that “thou comest to an agreement (Ittihád) with him,” <a href="#Page_189">189</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Tuhál or Tihál (<em>Arab.</em>) in text “Tayhál,” <em>tr.</em> “spleen,” <a href="#Page_53">53</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Turtúr = the Badawi’s bonnet, <a href="#Page_255">255</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Tutty, in low Lat. “Tutia” prob. from <em>Pers.</em> “Tutiyah” = protoxide of zinc, <a href="#Page_352">352</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Unsak (<em>Arab.</em>), an expression used when drinking one’s health (<em>tr.</em> “Thy favour”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_458">458</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">’Urrah (<em>Arab.</em>) = dung, <a href="#Page_75">75</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Usburú = be ye patient, <a href="#Page_83">83</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">“Verily great is their craft” (Koranic quotation from “Joseph”), <a href="#Page_294">294</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Violation of the Harem (son “having” his father’s wives), very common in Egypt, <a href="#Page_441">441</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Vows of Pious Moslems, <a href="#Page_234">234</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">“Wa Ghausáh!” = “Ho, to my aid,” <a href="#Page_157">157</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“—— inní la-ar’ákum wa ar’à widáda-kum,” etc., <em>tr.</em> “And I make much of you and your love,” etc. (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_172">172</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— Kulli Tárik = night-traveller, magician, morning-star, <a href="#Page_378">378</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“—— lá huwa, ashamná min-ka talkas (read “talkash”) ’alà Harimi-ná,” <em>tr.</em> “that thou wouldst strive to seduce our Harím” (or “that thou hadst an itching after our Harím”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_285">285</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“—— lásh: Murádí bas ism al-Madinah” (<em>Arab.</em>) = For nothing: my only want is the city’s name, <a href="#Page_402">402</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“—— lau anunahá li ’l-Mushrikín,” etc., lines which have occurred before, <a href="#Page_55">55</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“—— min-hum man fáha,” evidently an error of the scribe for “Man nafá-hu,” <a href="#Page_114">114</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— Nikáh = conjugal intercourse, <a href="#Page_153">153</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Wa sába’l-dár wa Zaujatu-hu mutawaṣṣín bi-há,” <em>tr.</em> “the house prospered, for the master and the dame had charge of it,” <a href="#Page_420">420</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— Steingass explains the plural “Mutawaṣṣín,” by supposing “Sáb al-Dár” is blunder for “Sáhibu ’l-Dár” and translates “the master of the house and his wife took charge of her (the nurse) during the days of suckling,” <a href="#Page_420">420</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“—— Sawábi ’hu (Asábi ’a-hu?) fí hanaki-h” <em>tr.</em> “his fingers in his mouth and sucking thereat,” <a href="#Page_419">419</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— Talattuf Alfázak wa ma’áník al-hisán = and for the pleasingness of thy sayings and meanings so fine and fair (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_146">146</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“—— zand mujauhar fí-hi Asáwir,” etc., may mean “and a fore-arm (became manifest) ornamented with jewels, on which were bracelets of red gold” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_86">86</a>–7.</li>
				<li class="c018">Waka’h (<em>Arab.</em>) = an affair (of fight), <a href="#Page_403">403</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Wakálah = inn (<em>tr.</em> “Caravanserai”), <a href="#Page_455">455</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“——” or caravanserai, <a href="#Page_273">273</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Walad al-Hayáh (for “Hayát”) <em>tr.</em> “Thou make him a child of life,” <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, let him be long-lived, <a href="#Page_378">378</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Wasayah (prob. cler. error for “wa Miah”—spelt “máyah”—and a hundred pair of pigeons) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_217">217</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Weapons taken from Easterns when embarking as passengers, ticketed and placed in safe cabin, <a href="#Page_403">403</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Well, Angels choking up a, <a href="#Page_332">332</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Well, filled in over the intruding “villain” of the piece, <a href="#Page_332">332</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Whose van was not known from its rear” = “both could not be seen at the same time,” <a href="#Page_189">189</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“—— weal Allah increase,” well nigh sole equiv. amongst Moslems of our “thank you,” <a href="#Page_325">325</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Wife (exalting the character of) whilst the Mistress is a mere shadow (kind of tale not unfrequent amongst Moslems), <a href="#Page_335">335</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Wiják = a stove, a portable hearth (<em>tr.</em> “a brazier”), <a href="#Page_110">110</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Without a vein swelling, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, so drunk that his circulation had apparently stopped, <a href="#Page_276">276</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“With the tongue of the case” = words suggested by the circumstance, <a href="#Page_9">9</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Wizzatayn = geese, <a href="#Page_357">357</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Woman, fulfilling the desires of, fatal to love, when she revolts against any reduction of it, <a href="#Page_91">91</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Womankind, Allah kill all” (note by Dr. Steingass), <a href="#Page_304">304</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Written,” either on the Preserved Tablet or on the Sutures of the Skull, <a href="#Page_398">398</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">Yá ’Ars, yá Mu’arras = O pimp, O pander, <a href="#Page_246">246</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Ya Ghárati a-zay má huná Rájil = O, the shame of me! however, O my Lord, can there be here a man? 247.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— Dr. Steingass explains and translates, <a href="#Page_247">247</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Yahya (according to Scott “Yiah”), <a href="#Page_153">153</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Yá = í and Mím = m, composing the word “Ibrahím,” <a href="#Page_203">203</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Yá’llah, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “By Allah,” meaning “Be quick!” 325.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Yállah, Yállah,” gen. meaning “Look sharp” (here syn. with “Allah! Allah!” = “I conjure thee by God”), <a href="#Page_302">302</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Yaman, Al-, people of, are still deep in the Sotadic Zone and practice, <a href="#Page_42">42</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Yarjú (presumably error for “Yarja’u”), <em>tr.</em> “retracing their steps,” <a href="#Page_382">382</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— (may be error for “Yajrú”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_382">382</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Yá Sín” = “The Heart of the Koran,” <a href="#Page_94">94</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Yastanít (<em>Arab.</em>), aor. to the pretext “istanat” (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_218">218</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Yastanit = he listened attentively (<em>tr.</em> “he firmly believed”) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_432">432</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Yasta’ amilúna al-Mrd” (<em>tr.</em> “their noblest make womanly use of Murd”)—may also have a number of meanings, <a href="#Page_42">42</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Yá Sultán-am = “O my chief,” <a href="#Page_312">312</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Yatama’ash min-hu, <em>tr.</em> “wherewith he might nourish himself,” <a href="#Page_472">472</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— a denominative of the 5th form of “Ma’ásh” = livelihood (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_473">473</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Yathrib = Al-Madinah, <a href="#Page_183">183</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Yathrib, the classical name <span xml:lang="grc">Ἰατρίππα</span> (one of the titles of “Madínat al-Nabi,” City of the Prophet), <a href="#Page_43">43</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Yá Wárid = “O farer to the fountain,” <a href="#Page_148">148</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Yazghaz-há fí Shikkati-ha = verb being prob. a cler. error for “Yazaghzagh” from ✓ “Zaghzagha” = he opened a skin bag (<em>tr.</em> “thrusting and foining at her cleft”), <a href="#Page_267">267</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Young man, being grown up, would not live in his father’s house, <a href="#Page_442">442</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Youth worn out by genial labours of the (marriage) night, but bride made the merrier and livelier (a neat touch of realism), <a href="#Page_429">429</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Yúzbáshí, in text “Uzbáshá” or “úzbáshá” = head of a hundred (men) centurion, captain, <a href="#Page_243">243</a>.</li>
				<li class="c005">“Zad Yakún Z R H ahad fí Mál jazíl, etc.” (error in MS. explained.) (<span class="sc">St.</span>), <a href="#Page_72">72</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Zahrat = a blossom especially yellow, commonly applied to orange-flower, <a href="#Page_201">201</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Zahrat al-Hayy, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, “Bloom of the Tribe,” <a href="#Page_201">201</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Zakarayn Wizz (ganders) simán,” <em>tr.</em> “a pair of fatted ganders,” <a href="#Page_357">357</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Zamaku-há, <em>tr.</em> “arabesque’d,” <a href="#Page_133">133</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Zakka (meaning primarily “a bird feeding her young”), <em>tr.</em> “largessed,” <a href="#Page_182">182</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Zarb al-Aklám = caligraphy, <a href="#Page_376">376</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— ——, <em>tr.</em> “penmanship,” <a href="#Page_432">432</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">—— al-Fál = casting lots for presage (<em>tr.</em> “prognostic,)” 374.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Zardiyá” (for Zaradiyyah = a small mail coat, a light helmet), <em>tr.</em> “a haubergeon,” <a href="#Page_58">58</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">“Zug” or draught which gave him rheumatism (<em>tr.</em> “the air smote me,”) <a href="#Page_157">157</a>.</li>
				<li class="c018">Zuhà, Al- (= undurn-hour, or before noon) and Maghrib (= set of sun) become Al-Ghaylah (= Siesta time) and Ghaybat al-Shams, in Badawi speech, <a href="#Page_151">151</a>.</li>
			</ul>
			<div/>
			<div class="ph2 section">
				<div class="nf-center-c1">
					<div class="c004 nf-center">
						<div>Appendix</div>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
