<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-15-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Fellah and His Wicked Wife<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7566" id="noteref-7566" epub:type="noteref">7566</a></h2>

<p>There was of olden time in the land of Egypt a Fellah, or tiller
of the ground, who had a fair woman to wife and she had another
man to friend. The husband used to sow every year some fifty
faddán<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7567" id="noteref-7567" epub:type="noteref">7567</a> of seeding-wheat wherein there was not one barley-grain,
and grind it in the mill and pass this meal to his spouse who
would sift it and bolt it. Then would she take the softest and best
of the flour to make thereof either scones or cakes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7568" id="noteref-7568" epub:type="noteref">7568</a> or something
more toothsome which she would give to her friend and feed him
therewith, whereas the refuse of the flour<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7569" id="noteref-7569" epub:type="noteref">7569</a> she would make into
loaves for her husband so this bread would be ruddy-brown of
hue.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7570" id="noteref-7570" epub:type="noteref">7570</a> Now every day about dawn-time the Fellah was wont fare
to his field either to ear or to delve and tarry there working till
noon at which time the wife would send him the bread of bran
and refuse flour, whilst to those beside him who wrought as he did,
would be brought from their homes white bread and clean. So
they said, “Ho certain person! thy wheat is from fine sowing-seed,
nor is there in it a barley-corn, how then be your bread like
unto barley?” Quoth he, “I know not.” He remained in such
case for a while of time whilst his wife fed her playmate with all
the good food and served to her husband the vilest of diet, until
one chance day of the days the Fellah took his plough and went
off at early dawn to work and wrought till midday when his wife
sent him his dinner of dirty bread. Hereupon he and his neighbours,
who were earing in the same field, took seat and each one
set before him white bread and seeing the Fellah’s scones brown as
barley-meal they marvelled thereat. They had with them a scald-head
boy who was sitting with them at the noon-meal, so they said
to the peasant, “Take thee to servant this youngster and he shall
manifest thee the case wherein thou art from the doings of thy
dame.” He obeyed their bidding——And Shahrazad was surprised
by the dawn of day and fell silent and ceased to say her permitted
say. Then quoth her sister Dunyazad, “How sweet is thy story,
O sister mine, and how enjoyable and delectable!” Quoth she,
“And where is this compared with that I would relate to you on
the coming night an the King suffer me to survive?” Now when
it was the next night, and that was</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>The Seven Hundred and Seventy-eighth Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Dunyazad said to her, “Allah upon thee, O my sister, an thou
be other than sleepy, finish for us thy tale that we may cut short
the watching of this our latter night!” She replied:——With love
and good will! It hath reached me, O auspicious King, the
director, the right-guiding, lord of the rede which is benefiting and
of deeds fair-seeming and worthy celebrating, that the Fellah
obeyed their bidding and took with him the scald-head youngster
for house-service and on the second day the lad fell to grinding
at the mill and carried the meal to his mistress and sat beside
her and anon she rose and sifted and bolted the flour; still he stayed
by her stealthily watching her while she kneaded it and balled it and
breaded it. After this he carried off the early meal for his master
and faring to the field set it before him and when the Fellah
looked upon it he cried, “O Boy, by Allah this bread is white and
’tis clean unlike the foregone.” Quoth he, “O my master, I have
ground it with my own hands and I sat beside my mistress the
while she got it ready, kneading it and baking it, wherefor she
availed not to do aught else with it.” Now when the servant-lad
had left the hut her lover came in asking, “Hast thou made bread
for me?” and she answered, “Indeed the boy with the scald-head
ceased not sitting beside me, nor was I able to bake aught for
thee.” But when the lad had gone forth to the field with his
master’s dinner he set it before him and returned in hot haste and
hurry to the house, where he found the friend of his mistress conversing
with her; so he hid himself behind the door and fell to
overhearing them and to noting whatso they said. Amongst other
things quoth she, “Take this quartern of good wheat and clean
grain and grind it in this mill and I will make thee a platter of
bread from handrubbed flour<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7571" id="noteref-7571" epub:type="noteref">7571</a> which I will send to thee on the
morrow.” Asked he, “How shalt thou know the field?” and she
answered, “Carry with thee a basket of bran and drop the contents
as thou walkest along the highway; then leave it hard by the
land belonging to thee and I will follow the traces and find thee
a-field; and so do thou remain at rest.” All this and the scald-head
boy was standing behind the door hearkening to their words
until he had understood them all. On the next day the lad took
a basket of bran which he scattered on the way to his master’s
land and then sat with him whilst the wife, after baking the platter
full of scones, carried it upon her head and fared forth intending
for her lover in the field. She marked the traces of the bran
which the scald-head had dropped and she ceased not following
them until she came to her husband’s field. Hereupon the lad
arose and taking the platter from her said, “By Allah, O my
master, verily my mistress loveth thee and favoureth thee, for that
she hath brought a bannock made from handrubbed grain; and
so saying he set it before him.” Presently she looked out of the
corner of her eye and saw her lover ploughing at a little distance
from them; so she said to her husband, “Allah upon thee, O
certain person, call aloud to so-and-so our neighbour that he may
come and eat the noon-meal with thee.” The man said, “’Tis
well;” and presently added, “O Boy, go forth and shout to such-an-one.”
Now the lad had brought with him a parcel of green
dates, so he arose and scattered them at intervals upon the highway;
and when he came to his mistress’s lover he cried aloud, “Do
thou come dine with my master.” But the man refused so to do
wherefore the scald-head returned and said, “He will not;” and
hereupon the wife bade her husband go himself and fetch him.
The Fellah trudged along the highway and finding thereon the
scattered dates bowed himself downwards to gather them when the
lover said to himself, “This one is picking up stones wherewith to
beat me;”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7572" id="noteref-7572" epub:type="noteref">7572</a> and as he saw the man often stoop he fled and left the
place, and the more the other cried to him, “Come hither, O
certain person,” the faster sped he in his running.——And Shahrazad
was surprised by the dawn of day and fell silent and ceased
saying her permitted say. Then quoth her sister Dunyazad, “How
sweet and tasteful is thy tale, O sister mine, and how enjoyable
and delectable!” Quoth she, “And where is this compared
with that I would relate to you on the coming night an the
Sovran suffer me to survive?” Now when it was the next night
and that was</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>The Seven Hundred and Seventy-ninth Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>Dunyazad said to her, “Allah upon thee, O my sister, an thou
be other than sleepy, finish for us thy tale that we may cut short
the watching of this our latter night!” She replied:——With
love and good will! It hath reached me, O auspicious King, the
director, the right-guiding, lord of the rede which is benefiting, and
of deeds fair-seeming and worthy celebrating, that the more that
man cried to the lover “Come,” the faster did he run away; so
the Fellah returned and said, “He misliketh to come and he hath
fled.” Hereupon he took seat together with the scald-head and
the neighbours to dine off the scones of handrubbed grain, and
the wife served to them whatso she had made for her lover’s eating
and she would not touch aught thereof but left it for her spouse
and for his servant and for the neighbours. On the following day
the Fellah went forth betimes to plough whilst the boy, delaying
purposely at home, hid himself behind the door when behold, the
lover entered to her, and she said, “’Tis my desire that we forge a
story whereby to slay my husband and Master Scald-head the
servant.” Quoth he, “How wilt thou slay them?” and quoth
she, “I will buy for them poison and make it up in cooked food, so
they may devour it together and perish together; after which we
will abide, I and thou, making merry, nor shall the dead disturb
us any more.” He rejoined, “Do what thou willest,” and all this
whilst the boy stood listening to them behind the door. But as
soon as the lover went forth the house, the lad arose and retired;
then, donning Jews’ garb he shouldered a pair of saddle-bags and
went about crying, “Ho! Aloes good for use. Ho! Pepper<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7573" id="noteref-7573" epub:type="noteref">7573</a> good
for use. Ho! Kohl good for use. Ho! Tutty good for use!”
Now when the woman saw him she came forth the house and
hailed him, “Ho thou the Jew!” and said he to her, “Yes, O my
lady.” Then said she, “Hast thou with thee aught of poison?”
and said he, “How, O my lady? Have I not with me poison of
the hour?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7574" id="noteref-7574" epub:type="noteref">7574</a> and whoever shall eat thereof in a mess of sweet milk<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7575" id="noteref-7575" epub:type="noteref">7575</a>
and rice and clarified butter shall die within that time.” “Do
thou take this dinar,” continued she, “and give me somewhat of
it;” but he rejoined, “I do not trade for moneys, and I will sell it
only for ornaments of precious metal.” Hereupon she pulled off
one of her anklets and handed it to him and he, who had provided
himself with half a loaf of Egyptian sugar,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7576" id="noteref-7576" epub:type="noteref">7576</a> gave her the moiety
thereof, saying, “Use it with sweet milk and rice and clarified
butter.” She took it in high glee, and arising milked the she-buffalo,
after which she boiled the loaf-sugar in the milk and then
threw it into a sufficiency of the rice and the clarified butter,
fancying the while that she was cooking a mortal meal,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7577" id="noteref-7577" epub:type="noteref">7577</a> and lastly
she ladled out the mess into a large platter. Now when it was
sunset-time her husband returned from the field and was met about
half-way by the boy who told him all that he had overheard and
how he had sold her the sugar for one of her anklets, saying,
“This be poison.” Then he charged him that, as soon as both of
them should have swallowed the mess of milk and rice and clarified
butter, they fall down and feign dead. So master and servant
agreed upon this plan. And when the Fellah entered the hut she
served to them the platter which contained their supper, and they
ate the whole thereof, she sitting by intent upon their action and
expecting their death. But they served her with a sleight; for
suddenly the Fellah changed countenance and made as though he
waxed ill and faint, and fell upon the ground like one in the last
agony, and shortly after the boy rolled upon the floor on similar
wise. Whenas she considered them she exclaimed, “May Allah
have no mercy upon you; the wretches are dead!” Hereupon
she went out and called aloud to her lover, and as he was coming
cried, “Hie thee hither and enjoy the sight of these dead ones;”
so he hastened up to them, and seeing them stretched upon the
floor said, “They’re dead.” Presently quoth she, “We two, I and
thou, will now make merry;” and so saying she withdrew with
him into another hut, intending at once to sleep together. Hereupon
the husband arose and went in to them and smote the lover
with a quarter-staff upon the neck and broke in his back bone,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7578" id="noteref-7578" epub:type="noteref">7578</a>
after which he turned to the wicked woman his wife and struck
her and split open her head, and left the twain stone dead. And
as soon as it was midnight he wrapped them in a single sheet and
carried them forth outside the village, and after choosing a place,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7579" id="noteref-7579" epub:type="noteref">7579</a>
dug a hole and thrust them therein. And ever after that same
Fellah had rest from his wife, and he bound himself by a strong
oath not to interwed with womankind—never no more.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7580" id="noteref-7580" epub:type="noteref">7580</a> And
now (quoth Shahrazad) I will recount to you another tale touching
the wiles of women; and thereupon she fell to relating the
adventure of</p>


  
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
