<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="volume-15" id="chapter-15-26" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Appendix I</h2>
			<p>
				<em>CATALOGUE OF WORTLEY MONTAGUE MANUSCRIPT CONTENTS.</em>
			</p>
			<p>I here proceed to offer a list of the tales in the Wortley Montague MS. (Nos. 550–556), beginning with</p>
			<h3 class="c013">VOL. I.,</h3>
			<p class="c014">which contains 472 pages = 92 Nights. It is rudely written, with great carelessness and frequent corrections, and there is a noted improvement in the subsequent vols. which Scott would attribute to another transcriber. This, however, I doubt: in vol. i. the scribe does not seem to have settled down to his work. The MS. begins abruptly and without caligraphic decoration; nor is there any red ink in vol. i. except for the terminal three words. The topothesia is in the land of Sásán, in the Isles of Al-Hind and Al-Sind; the elder King being called “Báz” and “Shár-báz” and the younger “Kahramán” (p. 1, ll. 5–6), and in the same page (l. 10) “Saharbán, King of Samarkand”; while the Wazir’s daughters are “Shahrzádah” and “Dunyázádah” (p. 8). The Introduction is like that of the Mac. Edit. (my text); but the dialogue between the Wazir and his Daughter is shortened, and the “Tale of the Merchant and his Wife,” including “The Bull and the Ass,” is omitted. Of novelties we find few. When speaking of the Queen and Mas’úd the Negro (called Sa’id in my text, p. 6) the author remarks:—</p>
			<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">Take no black to lover; pure musk tho’ he be ✿ Carrion-taint shall pierce to the nose of thee.</div>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>And in the “Tale of the Trader and the Jinni” (MS. 1, 9: see my transl. 1, 25) the ’Ifrit complains that the Merchant had thrown the date-stones without exclaiming “Dastúr!”—by thy leave.</p>
			<p>The following is a list of the Tales in vol. i.:—</p>
			<table class="table1" summary="">
				<colgroup>
					<col width="94%"/>
					<col width="5%"/>
				</colgroup>
				<tr>
					<th class="c007"/>
					<th class="c008">
						<span class="small">PAGE.</span>
					</th>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Introductory Chapter</td>
					<td class="c008">1–9</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Tale of the Trader and the Jinni, Night i.–ii.</td>
					<td class="c008">9</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The First Shaykh’s Story, Night ii.</td>
					<td class="c008">14</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Second Shaykh’s Story, Night ii.</td>
					<td class="c008">23</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Third Shaykh’s Story, Night iv.</td>
					<td class="c008">34</td>
				</tr>
			</table>
			<p>Scott, following “Oriental Collections,” ii. 34, supposes that the latter was omitted by M. Galland “on account of its indecency, it being a very free detail of the amours of an unfaithful wife.” The true cause was that it did not exist in Galland’s Copy of The Nights (Zotenberg, Histoire d’ ’Alâ al-Dîn, p. 37). Scott adds, “In this copy the Genie restores the Antelope, the Dogs and the Mule to their pristine forms, which is not mentioned by Galland, on their swearing to lead virtuous lives.”</p>
			<table class="table1" summary="">
				<colgroup>
					<col width="94%"/>
					<col width="5%"/>
				</colgroup>
				<tr>
					<th class="c007"/>
					<th class="c008">
						<span class="small">PAGE.</span>
					</th>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Conclusion of the Trader and the Jinni, Night v.</td>
					<td class="c008">43</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Fisherman and the Jinni, including the Tales of the Sage Dúbán and the ensorcelled Prince and omitting the Stories (1) of King Sindibád and his Falcon (2) the Husband and the Parrot and (3) the Prince and the Ogress:</td>
					<td class="c008">44</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Porter and the Three Ladies of Baghdad, Night v.</td>
					<td class="c008">100</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The First Kalandar’s Tale, Night xxxix.</td>
					<td class="c008">144</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Second Kalandar’s Tale, Night xlviii.</td>
					<td class="c008">152</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2">(<em>The beginning of this Tale is wanting in the MS. which omits p. 151: also The Envier and the Envied, admitted into the list of Hikáyát, is here absent.</em>)</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Third Kalandar’s Tale, Night lv.</td>
					<td class="c008">173</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Eldest Lady’s Tale, Night lxvi.</td>
					<td class="c008">231</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Tale of the Portress. Conclusion of the Story of the Porter and Three Ladies of Baghdad, Night lxii. (a clerical mistake for lxx.?)</td>
					<td class="c008">260</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2">(<em>In Galland follow the Voyages of Sindbad the Seaman which are not found in this copy.</em>)</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Tailor and the Hunchback, Night lxviii. (for lxxiv.)</td>
					<td class="c008">295</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Nazarene Broker’s Story, Night lxviii. (for lxxiv.?)</td>
					<td class="c008">308</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Youth whose hand was cut off, Night (?)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7728" id="noteref-7728" epub:type="noteref">7728</a></td>
					<td class="c008">312</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2">(<em>In p. 314 is a hiatus not accounting for the loss of hand.</em>)</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Barber’s Tale of his First Brother</td>
					<td class="c008">314</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">—— Second ——</td>
					<td class="c008">317</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">—— Third ——</td>
					<td class="c008">323</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">—— Fourth ——</td>
					<td class="c008">327</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">—— Fifth ——</td>
					<td class="c008">331</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">—— Sixth ——</td>
					<td class="c008">343</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The end of the Tale of the Hunchback, the Barber and others, Night lxviii. (?)</td>
					<td class="c008">350</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2">(HERE ENDS MY VOL. I.)</td>
				</tr>
			</table>
			<table class="table1" summary="">
				<colgroup>
					<col width="94%"/>
					<col width="5%"/>
				</colgroup>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"/>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Núr al-Dín Alí and the Damsel Anis al-Jalís, Night lxviii.</td>
					<td class="c008">355</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Sayf al-Mulúk and Badí’a al-Jamal, Night xci.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7729" id="noteref-7729" epub:type="noteref">7729</a></td>
					<td class="c008">401</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Tale of the Youth of Mosul whose hand was cut off, Night xcii.</td>
					<td class="c008">466–472</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2">(<em>The Tale of the Jewish Doctor in my vol. i. 288–300.</em>)</td>
				</tr>
			</table>
			<p>Vol. i. ends with a page of scrawls, the work of some by-gone owner.</p>
			<h3 class="c013">VOL. II.</h3>
			<p class="c014">Contains 316 pages, and includes end of Night xcii. to Night clxvi. The MS. is somewhat better written; the headings are in red ink and the verses are duly divided. The whole volume is taken up by the Tale of Kamar al-Zamán (1st), with the episodes of Al-Amjad and Al-As’ad, but lacking that of Ni’amah and Naomi. In Galland Kamar al-Zaman begins with Night ccxi.: in my translation with vol. iii. 212 and concludes in vol. iv. 29. This 2nd vol. (called in colophon the 4th Juz) ends with the date 20th Sha’abán, <abbr epub:type="se:era">AH</abbr> 1177.</p>
			<h3 class="c013">VOL. III.</h3>
			<p class="c014">Contains 456 pages, extending from Night cccvi. (instead of Night clxvii.) to cdxxv. and thus leaving an initial hiatus of 140 Nights (cxvi.–cccvi. C. de Perceval, vol. viii. p. 14). Thus the third of the original eight volumes is lost. On this subject Dr. White wrote to Scott, “One or two bundles of Arabic manuscript, of the same size and handwriting as the second volume of the Arabian Tales, were purchased at the sale by an agent for Mr. Beckford of Fonthill, and I have no doubt whatever but that the part deficient in your copy is to be found in his possession.” If such be the case, and everything seems to prove it, this volume was not No. iii. but No. iv. The MS. begins abruptly with the continuation of the tale. There is no list of contents, and at the end are two unimportant “copies of verses” addressed to the reader, five couplets rhyming in —ímu (<i><span xml:lang="la">e.g.</span></i> ta’dimu) and two in —af (<i><span xml:lang="la">e.g.</span></i> Salaf).</p>
			<p>The following is a list of the contents:—</p>
			<table class="table1" summary="">
				<colgroup>
					<col width="94%"/>
					<col width="5%"/>
				</colgroup>
				<tr>
					<th class="c007"/>
					<th class="c008">
						<span class="small">PAGE.</span>
					</th>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Part of the Tale of Hasan of Bassorah, Nights cccvi.–cccxxix.</td>
					<td class="c008">1–81</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Story of the Sultan of Al-Yaman<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7730" id="noteref-7730" epub:type="noteref">7730</a> and his Sons, told to Al-Rashíd by Hasan of Bassorah, Nights cccxxix.–cccxxxiv.</td>
					<td class="c008">81</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Story of the Three Sharpers,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7731" id="noteref-7731" epub:type="noteref">7731</a> Nights cccxxxiv.–cccxlii.</td>
					<td class="c008">96</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2">The Sultan who fared forth in the habit of a Darwaysh, Night</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">cccxlii.</td>
					<td class="c008">121</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">History of Mohammed, Sultan of Cairo, Night cccxliii.–cccxlviii.</td>
					<td class="c008">124</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Story of the First Lunatic,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7732" id="noteref-7732" epub:type="noteref">7732</a> Night cccxlviii.–ccclv.</td>
					<td class="c008">141</td>
				</tr>
			</table>
			<table class="table1" summary="">
				<colgroup>
					<col width="94%"/>
					<col width="5%"/>
				</colgroup>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"/>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Story of the Second Lunatic, Night ccclv.–ccclvii.</td>
					<td class="c008">168</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Story of the Sage and his Scholar, Night ccclvii.–ccclxii.</td>
					<td class="c008">179</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Night-Adventure of Sultan Mohammed of Cairo with three foolish Schoolmasters, Night ccclxii.</td>
					<td class="c008">204</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Tale of the Mother and her Three Daughters, Night ccclxii.</td>
					<td class="c008">206</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Story of the broke-back Schoolmaster, Night ccclxiii.</td>
					<td class="c008">211</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Story of the Split-mouthed Schoolmaster, Night ccclxiii.</td>
					<td class="c008">214</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Story of the limping Schoolmaster, Night ccclxiv.–ccclxv.</td>
					<td class="c008">219</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Story of the three Sisters and their Mother the Sultánah, Night ccclxvi.–ccclxxxvi.</td>
					<td class="c008">231</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">History of the Kází who bare a babe, Night ccclxxxvi.–cccxcii.</td>
					<td class="c008">322</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Tale of the Kazi and the Bhang-eater, Night cccxciii.–cdiii.</td>
					<td class="c008">344</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">History of the Bhang-eater and his wife, Night cccxciii.–cdiii.</td>
					<td class="c008">348</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">How Drummer Abú Kásim became a Kází, Night cdiii.–cdxii.</td>
					<td class="c008">372</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Story of the Kazi and his Slipper (including the Tale of the Bhang-eater who became the Just Wazir and who decided two difficult cases), Night cdxii.–cdxiii.</td>
					<td class="c008">424</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Tale of Mahmúd the Persian and the Kurd Sharper, Night cdiii.–cdxvi.</td>
					<td class="c008">428</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Tale of the Sultan and the poor man who brought to him fruit, including the Fruit-seller’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7733" id="noteref-7733" epub:type="noteref">7733</a> Tale, Night cdxvi.–cdxxv.</td>
					<td class="c008">432</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Story of the King of Al-Yaman and his Three Sons and the Enchanting Bird, which ends this volume, Night cdxvii-cdxxvi.</td>
					<td class="c008">437</td>
				</tr>
			</table>
			<h3 class="c013">VOL. IV.</h3>
			<p class="c014">Contains 456 pages, and ranges between Nights cdxxvi. and dxcvi.</p>
			<table class="table1" summary="">
				<colgroup>
					<col width="94%"/>
					<col width="5%"/>
				</colgroup>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Continuation of the Story of the King of Al-Yaman<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7734" id="noteref-7734" epub:type="noteref">7734</a> and his Three Sons and the Enchanting Bird, Night cdxxvi.–cdxxxix.</td>
					<td class="c008">1–34</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2">
						<span class="sc">Scott</span>
						<em>prefers “the Sultan of the East,” etc.</em>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">History of the First Larrikin, Night cdxxxix.–cdxliv.</td>
					<td class="c008">34</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>The first Sharper in the Cave</cite>,” <em>p.</em> 185.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">History of the Second Larrikin, Night cdxliii.–cdxlv.</td>
					<td class="c008">46</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">History of the Third Larrikin, Night cdxlv.–cdxlvi.</td>
					<td class="c008">53</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Story of a Sultan of Hind and his Son Mohammed, Night cdxlvi.–cdlviii.</td>
					<td class="c008">58</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>The Sultan of Hind.</cite>”</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Tale of a Fisherman and his Son, Night cdlix.–cdlxix.</td>
					<td class="c008">83</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Tale of the Third Larrikin concerning himself, Night cdlxix.–cdlxxii.</td>
					<td class="c008">107</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>The Unfortunate Lovers.</cite>”</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">History of Abú Niyyah and Abú Niyyatayn, Night cdlxxii.–cdlxxxiii.</td>
					<td class="c008">113</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>Abou Neeut, the well-intentioned Sultan of Moussul, and Abou Neeutteen, the double-minded.</cite>”</td>
				</tr>
			</table>
			<table class="table1" summary="">
				<colgroup>
					<col width="94%"/>
					<col width="5%"/>
				</colgroup>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"/>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Courtier’s Story, or Tale of the Nadím to the Emir of Cairo, Night cdlxxxiii.–cdxci.</td>
					<td class="c008">140</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>Story related to an Ameer of Egypt by a Courtier</cite>,” <em>p.</em> 229.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Another relation of the Courtier, Night cdcxi.</td>
					<td class="c008">157</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2">(<em>Here Iblis took the place of a musician.</em>)</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Shaykh with Beard shorn by the Shaytan, Night cdxcii.</td>
					<td class="c008">162</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">History of the King’s Son of Sind and the Lady Fatimah, Night cdxci.–di.</td>
					<td class="c008">165</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>The Sultan of Sind and Fatimah, daughter of Ummir<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7735" id="noteref-7735" epub:type="noteref">7735</a> (’Ámir) Ibn Naomann (Nu’umán).</cite>”</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">History of the Lovers of Syria, Night di.–dx.</td>
					<td class="c008">189</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>The Lovers of Syria.</cite>”</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">History of Al-Hajjaj bin Yusuf and the Young Sayyid, Night dx.–dxx.</td>
					<td class="c008">213</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>The Young Sayd and Hijauje.</cite>”</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Uns al-Wujúd and the Wazir’s Daughter Rose-in-hood, Night dxxi.–dxli.</td>
					<td class="c008">240</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>Ins al-Wujood and Wird al-Ikmaum, daughter of Ibrahim, Vizier of Sultan Shamìkh.</cite>”</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Story of the Sultan’s Son and Daughter of the Wazir, Night dxli.–dxlv.</td>
					<td class="c008">293</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Tale of Sultan Káyyish, Night dxlv.–dlvii.</td>
					<td class="c008">312</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2">(<em>A romance of chivalry and impossible contests of ten knights against 15,000 men.</em>)</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Young Lady transformed into a Gazelle by her Step-mother, Night dlviii.–dlxiii.</td>
					<td class="c008">345</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The History of Mázin, Night dlxviii.–dxcv. (omitted, because it is the same as “Hasan of Bassorah and the King’s Daughter of the Jinn,” vol. viii. 7); to the end of vol. iv.</td>
					<td class="c008">456</td>
				</tr>
			</table>
			<h3 class="c013">VOL. V.</h3>
			<p class="c014">Contains 465 pages from the beginning of Night dxcvi. to dccxlvi.</p>
			<table class="table1" summary="">
				<colgroup>
					<col width="94%"/>
					<col width="5%"/>
				</colgroup>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Continuation and end of the History of Mazin, Night dxcvi-dcxxiv.</td>
					<td class="c008">1–94</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Night adventure of Harun al-Rashid, Night dcxxxxi.–dcl.</td>
					<td class="c008">95</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>Adventure of Haroon al-Rusheed</cite>, <em>vol. vi. 343 (including Story related to Haroon al-Rusheed) by Ibn Munsoor of Damascus, of his adventures at Bussorah; the Story related to Haroon al-Rusheed by Munjaub (Manjab) and Haroon’s conduct on hearing the story of Munjaub.</em>”</td>
				</tr>
			</table>
			<table class="table1" summary="">
				<colgroup>
					<col width="94%"/>
					<col width="5%"/>
				</colgroup>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"/>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Tale of the Barber and his Son (told by Manjab), Night dlxi.–dcli.</td>
					<td class="c008">180</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>Story of the Sultan, the Dervishe and the Barber’s Son.</cite>”</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Badawi Woman and her Lover, Night dclv.–dclvi.</td>
					<td class="c008">196</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Story of the Wife and her two Gallants, Night dclvi.–dclx.</td>
					<td class="c008">199</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Tale of Princess Al-Hayfá and Prince Yusuf, Night dclx.–dccx.</td>
					<td class="c008">210</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>Story of Aleefah, daughter of Mherejaun, Sultan of Hind, and Eusuff, Prince of Sind, related to Haroun al-Rusheed by the celebrated reciter of Tales, Ibn Malook Aleed Iowaudee</cite>,” p. 352.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Adventures of the Three Princes of China, Night dccx.–dccxvii.</td>
					<td class="c008">362</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>Adventures of the Three Princes, sons of the Sultan of China.</cite>”</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">History of the first Brave, Night dccxvii.–dccxxii.</td>
					<td class="c008">385</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>The Military Braggadocio</cite>;” <span class="sc">Ouseley</span>, “<cite>the Gallant Officer</cite>;” <em>and the Lat. list</em> “<cite><span xml:lang="la">Miles Gloriosus</span></cite>.”</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">History of another Brave, Night dccxxii.–dccxxiii.</td>
					<td class="c008">395</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Merry Adventures of a Simpleton,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7736" id="noteref-7736" epub:type="noteref">7736</a> Night dccxxiii.–dccxxvi.</td>
					<td class="c008">400</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>The Idiot and his Asses.</cite>”</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Goodwife of Cairo and the three Rakehells, Night dccxxvi.–dccxxviii.</td>
					<td class="c008">409</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Story of the righteous Wazir wrongfully gaoled, Night dccxxviii.–dccxxxviii.</td>
					<td class="c008">416</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Tale of the Barber, the Captain and the Cairene Youth, Night dccxxxiii.–xxxviii.</td>
					<td class="c008">430</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2">(<em>In the Lat. list we find “<span xml:lang="la">Tonsor et Juvenis Cahirensis</span>.”</em>)</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Story of the Goodwife of Cairo and her Gallants, Night dccxxxviii.–dccxliii.</td>
					<td class="c008">444</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>The virtuous Woman of Cairo and her Suitors</cite>,” <em>p.</em> 380.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Kazi’s Tale of the Tailor, the Lady and the Captain,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7737" id="noteref-7737" epub:type="noteref">7737</a> Night dccxlii.–dccxlvi.</td>
					<td class="c008">455</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>The Cauzee’s Story</cite>,” <em>p.</em> 386.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Story of the Syrian and the Three Women of Cairo, Night dccxlvi. and to end of vol. v.</td>
					<td class="c008">465</td>
				</tr>
			</table>
			<h3 class="c013">VOL. VI.</h3>
			<p class="c014">Contains 365 pages, from Night dccxlvi. to Night dccclxxiii.</p>
			<p>The following is a list of the contents:—</p>
			<table class="table1" summary="">
				<colgroup>
					<col width="94%"/>
					<col width="5%"/>
				</colgroup>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Continuation of the Story of the Syrian, Night dccxlvi.–dccxlix.</td>
					<td class="c008">1–9</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Tale of the Káim-makám’s Lady and her two Coyntes, Night dccxlix.–dcclii.</td>
					<td class="c008">9</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Tale of the whorish Wife who vaunted her virtues, Night dcclii.–dcclv.</td>
					<td class="c008">18</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Cœlebs the Droll<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7738" id="noteref-7738" epub:type="noteref">7738</a> and his Wife and her four lovers, Night dcclv.–dcclx.</td>
					<td class="c008">26</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>The Deformed Jester.</cite>”</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Gate-keeper of Cairo and the wily She-Thief, Night dcclix.–dcclxv.</td>
					<td class="c008">41</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>The aged Watchman of Cairo and the artful female thief.</cite>”</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Tale of Mohsin and Musa, Night dcclxv.–dcclxxii.</td>
					<td class="c008">57</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>Mhassun the liberal and Mousseh the treacherous Friend.</cite>”</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Mohammed Shalabí<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7739" id="noteref-7739" epub:type="noteref">7739</a> and his Wife and the Kazi’s Daughter, Night dcclxxii.–dcclxxvii.</td>
					<td class="c008">76</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>Mahummud Julbee</cite>,” <em>etc.</em></td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Fellah and his wicked Wife, Night dcclxxvii.–dcclxxx.</td>
					<td class="c008">92</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Woman who humoured her Lover at her Husband’s expense, Night dcclxxx.–dcclxxxi.</td>
					<td class="c008">102</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>The Adulteress.</cite>”</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Kazi Schooled by his Wife, Night dcclxxxi.–dcclxxxv.</td>
					<td class="c008">106</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Merchant’s Daughter and the Prince of Al-Irák, Night dccclxv.–dcccxxiv.</td>
					<td class="c008">118</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>Story of the Merchant, his Daughter, and the Prince of Eerauk</cite>,” <em>p.</em> 391. <em>In the text we find ’Irák for Al-Irák.</em></td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Story of Ahmad and Ali who cuckolded their Masters, Night dcccxxiv.–dcccxxix.</td>
					<td class="c008">225</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>The Two Orphans.</cite>”</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Fellah and his fair Wife, Night dcccxxix.–dcccxxx.</td>
					<td class="c008">241</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Youth who would futter his Father’s Wives, Night dcccxxx.–dcccxxxviii.</td>
					<td class="c008">247</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>The Vicious Son, translating the Arab. Al-Ibn al-Fidawí.</cite>”</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The two Lack-tacts of Cairo and Damascus, including the short “Tale of the Egyptian, the Syrian and the Ass,” Night dcccxxxviii.–dcccxl.</td>
					<td class="c008">261</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c009" colspan="2"><span class="sc">Scott</span>: “<cite>The two wits of Cairo and Sind.</cite>”</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Tale of Musa and Ibrahim, including Anecdotes of the Berberines, Night dcccxl.–dcccxliii.</td>
					<td class="c008">271</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Brother Wazirs, Ahmad and Mohammed, Night dcccxiiii.–dccclxxiii.</td>
					<td class="c008">280</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">And to end of vol. vi.</td>
					<td class="c008">365</td>
				</tr>
			</table>
			<div>
				<h3 class="c013">VOL. VII.</h3>
			</div>
			<p class="c014">Contains 447 pages, from Night dccclxxiii.–mi.</p>
			<p>The following is a list of the contents:—</p>
			<table class="table1" summary="">
				<colgroup>
					<col width="94%"/>
					<col width="5%"/>
				</colgroup>
				<tr>
					<th class="c007"/>
					<th class="c008">
						<span class="small">PAGE.</span>
					</th>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Conclusion of the Brother Wazirs</td>
					<td class="c008">1–69</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Story of the thieving Youth and his Step-mother, Night dcccxcvii.–cm.</td>
					<td class="c008">69</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Kazi of Baghdad and his virtuous Wife, Night cm.–cmxi.</td>
					<td class="c008">77</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">History of the Sultan who protected the Kazi’s Wife, Night cmxi.–cmxvii.</td>
					<td class="c008">109</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Sultan of Al-’Irák, Zunnár ibn Zunnár, Night cmxvii.–cmxxi.</td>
					<td class="c008">126</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Ardashir, Prince of Persia, and the Princess Hayát al-Nufús, daughter of Sultan Kádir, Night cmxxi.–cmlxviii.</td>
					<td class="c008">139</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Story of Shaykh Nakkit the Fisherman, Night cmlxviii.–cmlxxviii.</td>
					<td class="c008">297</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Sultan of Andalusia, and the Prince of Al-’Irák who deflowered the Wazir’s daughter; a prose replica of Al-Hayfá and Yusuf. MS. vol. v. 210. Night cmlxxviii.–cmlxxxviii.</td>
					<td class="c008">329</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">Tale of Sultan Taylún and the generous Fellah, Night cmlxxxviii.–cmxciv.</td>
					<td class="c008">365</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The retired Sage and his Servant-lad, Night cmxcviii.</td>
					<td class="c008">414</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td> </td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td class="c007">The Merchant’s Daughter who married an Emperor of China, Night cmxcviii.–mi., ending the work</td>
					<td class="c008">430–447</td>
				</tr>
			</table>
			<p>This MS. terminates The Nights with the last tale and has no especial conclusion relating the marriage of the two brother Kings with the two sisters.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
