<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Memorandum</h2>


<p>I make no apology for the number and extent of bibliographical
and other lists given in this Appendix: they may cumber the
book but they are necessary to complete my design. This has
been to supply throughout the ten volumes the young Arabist
and student of Orientalism and Anthropology with such assistance
as I can render him; and it is my conviction that if with the
aid of this version he will master the original text of the
“Thousand Nights and a Night,” he will find himself at home
amongst educated men in Egypt and Syria, Najd and Mesopotamia
and be able to converse with them like a gentleman; not, as
too often happens in Anglo-India, like a “Ghoráwálá” (groom).
With this object he will learn by heart what instinct and inclination
suggest of the proverbs and instances, the verses, the <span xml:lang="fr">jeux
d’esprit</span> and especially the Koranic citations scattered about the
text; and my indices will enable him to hunt up the tale or the
verses which he may require for quotation even when writing an
ordinary letter to a “native” correspondent. Thus he will be
spared the wasted labour of wading through volumes in order to
pick up a line.</p>

<p>The following is the list of Indices:—</p>

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c006">
    <div><span class="sc">Appendix I.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c034"><span class="fss">I.</span> Index to the Tales in the ten Volumes.</p>

<p class="c034"><span class="fss">II.</span> Alphabetical Table of the Notes (Anthropological, etc.) prepared by
F. Steingass, Ph.D.</p>

<p class="c034"><span class="fss">III.</span> Alphabetical Table of First Lines (metrical portion) in English and
Arabic, prepared by Dr. Steingass.</p>

<p class="c034"><span class="fss">IV.</span> Tables of Contents of the various Arabic texts.</p>

<p class="c035"><span class="fss">A.</span> The Unfinished Calcutta Edition (1814–18).</p>

<p class="c035"><span class="fss">B.</span> The Breslau Text (1825–43) from Mr. Payne’s Version.</p>

<p class="c035"><span class="fss">C.</span> The Macnaghten or Turner-Macan Text (A.D. 1839–42), and the
Bulak Edition (A.H. 1251 = A.D. 1835–36), from Mr. Payne’s
Version.</p>

<p class="c035"><span class="fss">D.</span> The same with Mr. Lane’s and my Version.</p>

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c006">
    <div><span class="sc">Appendix II.</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c010">Contributions to the Bibliography of the Thousand and One Nights, and
their Imitations, with a Table shewing the contents of the principal editions
and translations of the Nights. By W. F. Kirby, Author of “Ed-Dimiryaht,
an Oriental Romance;” “The New Arabian Nights,” &amp;c.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
