<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="volume-3" id="chapter-3-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Cat<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1399" id="noteref-1399" epub:type="noteref">1399</a> and the Crow</h2>
			<p>Once upon a time, a crow and a cat lived in brotherhood; and one day as they were together under a tree, behold, they spied a leopard making towards them, and they were not aware of his approach till he was close upon them. The crow at once flew up to the tree-top; but the cat abode confounded and said to the crow, "O my friend, hast thou no device to save me, even as all my hope is in thee?" Replied the crow, "Of very truth it behoveth brethren, in case of need, to cast about for a device when peril overtaketh them, and how well saith the poet!—</p>
			<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">A friend in need is he who, ever true, ✿ For thy well-doing would himself undo:</div>
						<div class="line">One who when Fortune gars us parting rue ✿ Victimeth self reunion to renew."</div>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>Now hard by that tree were shepherds with their dogs; so the crow flew towards them and smote the face of the earth with his wings, cawing and crying out. Furthermore he went up to one of the dogs and flapped his wings in his face and flew up a little way, whilst the dog ran after him thinking to catch him. Presently, one of the shepherds raised his head and saw the bird flying near the ground and lighting alternately; so he followed him, and the crow ceased not flying just high enough to save himself and to throw out the dogs; and yet tempting them to follow for the purpose of tearing him to pieces. But as soon as they came near him, he would fly up a little; and so at last he brought them to the tree, under which was the leopard. And when the dogs saw him they rushed upon him and he turned and fled. Now the leopard thought to eat the cat who was saved by the craft of his friend the crow. This story, O King, showeth that the friendship of the Brothers of Purity<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1400" id="noteref-1400" epub:type="noteref">1400</a> delivereth and saveth from difficulties and from falling into mortal dangers. And they also tell a tale of</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
