<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Lovers of the Banu<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2172" id="noteref-2172" epub:type="noteref">2172</a> Ozrah</h2>

<p>There was once, among the Banu ‘Ozrah, a handsome and accomplished
man, who was never a single day out of love, and it
chanced that he became enamoured of a beauty of his own tribe
and sent her many messages; but she ceased not to entreat him
with cruelty and disdain; till, for stress of love and longing and
desire and distraction, he fell sick of a sore sickness and took to
his pillow and murdered sleep. His malady redoubled on him
and his torments increased and he was well nigh dead when his
case became known among the folk and his passion notorious——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her
permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Three Hundred and Eighty-fourth Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the man
took to his pillow and murdered sleep. So his case became known
among the folk and his passion notorious; and his infirmity grew
upon him and his pains redoubled till he was well nigh dead. His
family and hers were urgent with her to visit him, but she refused,
till he was at the point of death when, being told of this, she
relented towards him and vouchsafed him a visit. As soon as he
saw her, his eyes ran over with tears and he repeated from a
broken heart:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">An, by thy life, pass thee my funeral train, ✿ A bier upborne upon the necks of four,</div>
      <div class="line">Wilt thou not follow it, and greet the grave ✿ Where shall my corpse be graved for evermore?</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>Hearing this, she wept with sore weeping and said to him, “By
Allah, I suspected not that passion had come to such a pass
with thee, as to cast thee into the arms of death! Had I wist of
this, I had been favourable to thy wish, and thou shouldst have
had thy will.” At this his tears streamed down even as the clouds
rail rain, and he repeated this verse:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">She drew near whenas death was departing us, ✿ And deigned union grant when ‘twas useless all.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>Then he groaned one groan and died. So she fell on him, kissing
him and weeping and ceased not weeping till she swooned away;
and when she came to herself, she charged her people to bury her
in his grave and with streaming eyes recited these two couplets:-</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">We lived on earth a life of fair content; ✿ And tribe and house and home of us were proud;</div>
      <div class="line">But Time in whirling flight departed us, ✿ To join us now in womb of earth and shroud.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2173" id="noteref-2173" epub:type="noteref">2173</a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>Then she fell again to weeping, nor gave over shedding tears and
lamenting till she fainted away; and she lay three days, senseless.
Then she died and was buried in his grave. This is one of
the strange chances of love.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2174" id="noteref-2174" epub:type="noteref">2174</a> And I have heard related a tale of
the</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
