<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5-35" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Illiterate Who Set Up for a Schoolmaster</h2>

<p>There was once, among the menials<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2244" id="noteref-2244" epub:type="noteref">2244</a> of a certain mosque, a
man who knew not how to write or even to read and who gained
his bread by gulling folk. One day, it occurred to him to open a
school and teach children; so he got together writing-tablets and
written papers and hung them up in a high place. Then he
greatened his turband<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2245" id="noteref-2245" epub:type="noteref">2245</a> and sat down at the door of the school;
and when the people, who passed by, saw his huge head-gear and
tablets and scrolls, they thought he must be a very learned pedagogue;
so they brought him their children; and he would say to
this, “Write,” and to that “Read”; and thus the little ones
taught one another. Now one day, as he sat as of wont, at the
door of the school, behold, up came a woman letter in hand, and
he said in his mind, “This woman doubtless seeketh me, that I
may read her the missive she hath in her hand: how shall I do
with her, seeing I cannot read writing?” And he would fain have
gone down and fled from her; but, before he could do this, she
overtook him and said to him, “Whither away?” Quoth he, “I
purpose to pray the noon-prayer and return.” Quoth she, “Noon
is yet distant, so read me this letter.” He took the letter and
turning it upside down, fell to looking at it, now shaking his head
till his turband quivered, then dancing his eyebrows and anon
showing anger and concern. Now the letter came from the woman’s
husband, who was absent; and when she saw the dominie do on
this wise, she said to herself, “Doubtless my husband is dead, and
this learned doctor of law and religion is ashamed to tell me so.”
So she said to him, “O my lord, if he be dead, tell me;” but he
shook his head and held his peace. Then said she, “Shall I rend
my raiment?” “Rend!” replied he. “Shall I beat my face?”
asked she; and he answered, “Beat!” So she took the letter
from his hand and returning home fell a-weeping, she and her
children. Presently, one of her neighbours heard her sobbing and
asking what ailed her, was answered, “Of a truth she hath gotten
a letter, telling her that her husband is dead.” Quoth the man,
“This is a falsehood; for I had a letter from him but yesterday,
advising me that he is whole and in good health and will be with
her after ten days.” So he rose forthright and going in to her, said,
“Where is the letter which came to thee?” She brought it to him,
and he took it and read it; and lo! it ran as follows, “After the
usual salutations, I am well and in good health and whole and will
be with you all after ten days. Meanwhile, I send you a quilt and
an extinguisher.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2246" id="noteref-2246" epub:type="noteref">2246</a> So she took the letter and, returning with it
to the schoolmaster, said to him, “What induced thee to deal thus
with me?” And she repeated to him what her neighbour had
told her of her husband’s well-being and of his having sent her a
quilt and an extinguisher. Answered he, “Thou art in the right,
O good woman; for I was, at the time”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fourth Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the pedagogue
replied, “Verily I was at that time fashed and absent-minded
and, seeing the extinguisher wrapped up in the quilt,
I thought that he was dead and they had shrouded him.” The
woman, not smoking the cheat, said, “Thou art excused,” and
taking the letter, went her ways.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2247" id="noteref-2247" epub:type="noteref">2247</a> And they relate a story of</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
