<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Caliph Omar Bin Abd al-Aziz and the Poets<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5148" id="noteref-5148" epub:type="noteref">5148</a></h2>

<p>It is said that, when the Caliphate devolved on Omar bin
Abd al-Aziz<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5149" id="noteref-5149" epub:type="noteref">5149</a> (of whom Allah accept), the poets resorted to him,
as they had been used to resort to the Caliphs before him, and
abode at his door days and days, but he suffered them not to
enter, till there came to him ’Adí bin Artah,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5150" id="noteref-5150" epub:type="noteref">5150</a> who stood high in
esteem with him. Jarír<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5151" id="noteref-5151" epub:type="noteref">5151</a> accosted him and begged him to crave
admission for them to the presence; so Adi answered, “’Tis
well;” and, going in to Omar, said to him, “The poets are at
thy door and have been there days and days; yet hast thou not
given them leave to enter, albeit their sayings abide<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5152" id="noteref-5152" epub:type="noteref">5152</a> and their
arrows from mark never fly wide.” Quoth Omar, “What have I
to do with the poets?” and quoth Adi, “O Commander of the
Faithful, the Prophet (Abhak!)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5153" id="noteref-5153" epub:type="noteref">5153</a> was praised by a poet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5154" id="noteref-5154" epub:type="noteref">5154</a> and gave
him largesse, and in him<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5155" id="noteref-5155" epub:type="noteref">5155</a> is an exemplar to every Moslem.”
Quoth Omar, “And who praised him?” and quoth Adi, “’Abbás
bin Mirdás<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5156" id="noteref-5156" epub:type="noteref">5156</a> praised him, and he clad him with a suit and said, O
Generosity,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5157" id="noteref-5157" epub:type="noteref">5157</a> cut off from me his tongue!” Asked the Caliph,
“Dost thou remember what he said?” and Adi answered, “Yes.”
Rejoined Omar, “Then repeat it;” so Adi repeated:—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5158" id="noteref-5158" epub:type="noteref">5158</a></p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I saw thee, O thou best of human race, ✿ Bring out a Book which brought to graceless Grace.</div>
      <div class="line">Thou showedst righteous road to men astray ✿ From Right, when darkest Wrong had ta’en its place;—</div>
      <div class="line">Thou with Islám didst light the gloomiest way, ✿ Quenching with proof live coals of frowardness;</div>
      <div class="line">I own for Prophet mine Mohammed’s self; ✿ And man’s award upon his word we base;</div>
      <div class="line">Thou madest straight the path that crooked ran, ✿ Where in old days foul growth o’ergrew its face.</div>
      <div class="line">Exalt be thou in Joy’s empyrean ✿ And Allah’s glory ever grow apace.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c000">“And indeed (continued Adi), this Elegy on the Prophet
(Abhak!) is well known and to comment it would be tedious.”
Quoth Omar, “Who is at the door?” and quoth Adi, “Among
them is Omar ibn Abi Rabí’ah, the Korashí”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5159" id="noteref-5159" epub:type="noteref">5159</a>; whereupon the
Caliph cried, “May Allah show him no favour neither quicken
him! Was it not he who said these verses:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Would Heaven what day Death shall visit me ✿ I smell as thy droppings and drippings<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5160" id="noteref-5160" epub:type="noteref">5160</a> smell!</div>
      <div class="line">Could I in my clay-bed on Salmá lie ✿ There to me were better than Heaven or Hell!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c000">Had he not been (continued the Caliph) the enemy of Allah, he
had wished for her in this world, so he might after repent and
return to righteous dealing. By Allah, he shall not come in to
me! Who is at the door other than he?” Quoth Adi, “Jamíl
bin Ma’mar al-Uzri<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5161" id="noteref-5161" epub:type="noteref">5161</a> is at the door;” and quoth Omar, “’Tis he
who saith in one of his elegies:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Would Heaven conjoint we lived, and if I die ✿ Death only grant me a grave within her grave:</div>
      <div class="line">For I’d no longer deign to live my life ✿ If told upon her head is laid the pave.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5162" id="noteref-5162" epub:type="noteref">5162</a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c000">Quoth Omar, “Away with him from me! Who is at the
door?” and quoth Adi, “Kuthayyir ’Azzah”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5163" id="noteref-5163" epub:type="noteref">5163</a>; whereupon Omar
cried, “’Tis he who saith in one of his odes:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Some talk of faith and creed and nothing else ✿ And wait for pains of Hell in prayer-seat;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5164" id="noteref-5164" epub:type="noteref">5164</a></div>
      <div class="line">But did they hear what I from Azzah heard, ✿ They’d make prostration, fearfull, at her feet.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c000">“Leave the mention of him. Who is at the door?” Quoth
Adi, “Al-Ahwas al-’Ansárí.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5165" id="noteref-5165" epub:type="noteref">5165</a> Cried Omar, “Allah Almighty
put him away and estrange him from His mercy! Is it not he
who said, berhyming on a Medinite’s slave-girl, so she might
outlive her lord:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Allah be judge betwixt me and her lord! ✿ Who ever flies with her and I pursue.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c000">“He shall not come in to me. Who is at the door, other than
he?” Adi replied, “Hammám bin Ghálib al-Farazdak;”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5166" id="noteref-5166" epub:type="noteref">5166</a> and
Omar said, “’Tis he who saith, glorying in whoring:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Two girls let me down eighty fathoms deep, ✿ As low sweeps a falcon wi’ pinions spread;</div>
      <div class="line">And cried, as my toes touched the ground, “Dost live ✿ To return, or the fall hath it done thee dead?”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c000">“He shall not come in to me. Who is at the door, other than
he?” Adi replied, “Al-Akhtal al-Taghlibí”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5167" id="noteref-5167" epub:type="noteref">5167</a> and Omar said,
“He is the Miscreant who saith in his singing:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ramazan I ne’er fasted in life-time; nay ✿ I ate flesh in public at undurn day<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5168" id="noteref-5168" epub:type="noteref">5168</a>;</div>
      <div class="line">Nor chide I the fair, save in way of love, ✿ Nor seek Meccah’s plain<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5169" id="noteref-5169" epub:type="noteref">5169</a> in salvation-way:</div>
      <div class="line">Nor stand I praying like rest who cry ✿ “Hie salvationwards”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5170" id="noteref-5170" epub:type="noteref">5170</a> at the dawn’s first ray.</div>
      <div class="line">But I drink her cooled<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5171" id="noteref-5171" epub:type="noteref">5171</a> by fresh Northern breeze ✿ And my head at dawn to her prone I lay.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5172" id="noteref-5172" epub:type="noteref">5172</a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c000">“By Allah, he treadeth no carpet of mine! Who is at the door,
other than he?” Said Adi, “Jarír ibn al-Khatafah”; and Omar
cried, “’Tis he who saith:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">But for ill-spying glances had our eyes espied ✿ Eyne of the antelope and ringlets of the Reems.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5173" id="noteref-5173" epub:type="noteref">5173</a></div>
      <div class="line">A Huntress of the eyes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5174" id="noteref-5174" epub:type="noteref">5174</a> by night-tide came and I ✿ Cried, “Turn in peace, no time for visit this, meseems!”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c000">“An it must be and no help, admit Jarir.” So Adi went forth
and admitted Jarir, who entered, saying:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Yea, he who sent Mohammed unto man, ✿ A just successor for Imám<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5175" id="noteref-5175" epub:type="noteref">5175</a> assigned.</div>
      <div class="line">His ruth and justice all mankind embrace, ✿ To daunt the bad and stablish well-designed.</div>
      <div class="line">Verily now I look to present good, ✿ For man hath ever-transient weal in mind.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c000">Quoth Omar, “O Jarir, keep the fear of Allah before thine eyes
and say naught save the sooth.” And Jarir recited these couplets:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">How many widows loose the hair in far Yamámah-land<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5176" id="noteref-5176" epub:type="noteref">5176</a> ✿ How many an orphan there abides feeble of voice and eye,</div>
      <div class="line">Since faredst thou who wast to them instead of father lost ✿ When they like nested fledglings were sans power to creep or fly!</div>
      <div class="line">And now we hope, since brake the clouds their word and troth with us, ✿ Hope from the Caliph’s grace to gain a rain<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5177" id="noteref-5177" epub:type="noteref">5177</a> that ne’er shall dry.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c000">When the Caliph heard this, he said “By Allah, O Jarir, Omar
possesseth but an hundred dirhams.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5178" id="noteref-5178" epub:type="noteref">5178</a> Ho, boy! do thou give them to
him.” Moreover, he gifted him with the ornaments of his sword;
and Jarir went forth to the other poets, who asked him, “What is
behind thee?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5179" id="noteref-5179" epub:type="noteref">5179</a> and he answered, “A man who giveth to the
poor and denieth the poets, and with him I am well-pleased.”</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
