<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Mohammed Al-Amin and the Slave-Girl</h2>

<p>Ja’afar bin Musá al-Hádi<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2206" id="noteref-2206" epub:type="noteref">2206</a> once had a slave-girl, a lutist,
called Al-Badr al-Kabír, than whom there was not in her time
a fairer of face nor shapelier of shape nor a more elegant of
manners nor a more accomplished in the art of singing and
striking the strings; she was indeed perfect in beauty and
extreme in every charm. Now Mohammed al-Amín,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2207" id="noteref-2207" epub:type="noteref">2207</a> son of
Zubaydah, heard of her and was urgent with Ja’afar to sell her
to him; but he replied, “Thou knowest it beseemeth not one
of my rank to sell slave-girls nor set prices on concubines; but
were she not a rearling I would send her to thee, as a gift, nor
grudge her to thee.” And Mohammed al-Amin, some days after
this went to Ja’afar’s house, to make merry; and the host set
before him that which it behoveth to set before true friends and
bade the damsel Al-Badr al-Kabir sing to him and gladden him.
So she tuned the lute and sang with a ravishing melody; whilst
Mohammed al-Amin fell to drinking and jollity and bade the cupbearers
ply Ja’afar with much wine, till they made him drunken,
when he took the damsel and carried her to his own house, but
laid not a finger on her. And when the morrow dawned he bade
invite Ja’afar; and when he came, he set wine before him and
made the girl sing to him, from behind the curtain. Ja’afar knew
her voice and was angered at this, but, of the nobleness of his
nature and the magnanimity of his mind he showed no change.
Now when the carousal was at an end, Al-Amin commanded one
of his servants to fill the boat, wherein Ja’afar had come, with
dirhams and dinars and all manner of jewels and jacinths and rich
raiment and goods galore. So he laid therein a thousand myriads
of money and a thousand fine pearls, each worth twenty thousand
dirhams; nor did he give over loading the barge with all manner
of things precious and rare, till the boatmen cried out for help,
saying, “The boat can’t hold any more;” whereupon he bade them
carry all this to Ja’afar’s palace. Such are the exploits of the
magnanimous, Allah have mercy on them! And a tale is related
of</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
