<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Tale of Ma’an the Son of Zaidah</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="volume-4" id="chapter-4-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="title">Tale of Ma’an the Son of Zaidah<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1768" id="noteref-1768" epub:type="noteref">1768</a></h3>
			<p>It is told of Ma’an bin Záidah that, being out one day a-chasing and a-hunting, he became athirst but his men had no water with them; and while thus suffering behold, three damsels met him bearing three skins of water;——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.</p>
			<p><span class="night-announcement">Now when it was the Two Hundred and Seventy-first Night,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1769" id="noteref-1769" epub:type="noteref">1769</a></span> She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that three girls met him bearing three skins of water; so he begged drink of them, and they gave him to drink. Then he sought of his men somewhat to give the damsels but they had no money; so he presented to each girl ten golden-piled arrows from his quiver. Whereupon quoth one of them to her friend, “Well-a-day! These fashions pertain to none but Ma’an bin Zaidah! so let each one of us say somewhat of verse in his praise.” Then quoth the first:—</p>
			<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>He heads his arrows with piles of gold,</span>
						<span>✿ And while shooting his foes is his bounty doled:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Affording the wounded a means of cure,</span>
						<span>✿ And a sheet for the bider beneath the mould!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">And quoth the second:—</p>
			<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>A warrior showing such open hand,</span>
						<span>✿ His boons all friends and all foes enfold:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>The piles of his arrows of or are made,</span>
						<span>✿ So that battle his bounty may not withhold!</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">And quoth the third:—</p>
			<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>
						<span>From that liberal hand on his foes he rains</span>
						<span>✿ Shafts aureate-headed and manifold:</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>Wherewith the hurt shall chirurgeon pay,</span>
						<span>✿ And for slain the shrouds round their corpses roll’d.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1770" id="noteref-1770" epub:type="noteref">1770</a></span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">And there is also told a tale of</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
