<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5-55" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Abu Al-Husn and His Slave-girl Tawaddud<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2354" id="noteref-2354" epub:type="noteref">2354</a></h2>

<p>There was once in Baghdad a man of consequence and rich in
monies and immoveables, who was one of the chiefs of the
merchants; and Allah had largely endowed him with worldly
goods, but had not vouchsafed him what he longed for of
offspring; and there passed over him a long space of time,
without his being blessed with issue, male or female. His years
waxed great; his bones became wasted and his back bent;
weakness and weariness grew upon him, and he feared the loss
of his wealth and possessions, seeing he had no child whom he
might make his heir and by whom his name should be remembered.
So he betook himself with supplication to Almighty
Allah, fasting by day and praying through the night. Moreover,
he vowed many vows to the Living, the Eternal; and
visited the pious and was constant in supplication to the Most
Highest, till He gave ear to him and accepted his prayer and
took pity on his straining and complaining; so that, before
many days were past, he knew carnally one of his women and she
conceived by him the same night. In due time she finished her
months and, casting her burden, bore a male child as he were
a slice of the moon; whereupon the merchant fulfilled his vows
in his gratitude to Allah, (to whom be honour and glory!) and
gave alms and clothed the widow and the orphan. On the
seventh night after the boy’s birth, he named him Abu al-Husn,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2355" id="noteref-2355" epub:type="noteref">2355</a>
and the wet-nurses suckled him and the dry-nurses dandled
him and the servants and the slaves carried him and handled
him, till he shot up and grew tall and throve greatly and learnt
the Sublime Koran and the ordinances of Al-Islam and the
canons of the True Faith; and calligraphy and poetry and
mathematics and archery. On this wise he became the union-pearl
of his age and the goodliest of the folk of his time and
his day; fair of face and of tongue fluent, carrying himself with
a light and graceful gait and glorying in his stature proportionate
and amorous graces which were to many a bait: and his cheeks
were red and flower-white was his forehead and his side face
waxed brown with tender down, even as saith one, describing
him:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">The spring of the down on cheeks right clearly shows: ✿ And how when the Spring is gone shall last the rose?</div>
      <div class="line">Dost thou not see that the growth upon his cheek ✿ Is violet-bloom that from its leaves outgrows.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>He abode awhile in ease and happiness with his father, who
rejoiced and delighted in him, till he came to man’s estate,
when the merchant one day made him sit down before him and
said, “O my son, the appointed term draweth near; my hour of
death is at hand and it remaineth but to meet Allah (to whom
belong Majesty and Might!). I leave thee what shall suffice thee,
even to thy son’s son, of monies and mansions, farms and gardens;
wherefore, fear thou Almighty Allah, O my son, in dealing with
that which I bequeath to thee and follow none but those who will
help thee to the Divine favour.” Not long after, he sickened and
died; so his son ordered his funeral,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2356" id="noteref-2356" epub:type="noteref">2356</a> after the goodliest wise, and
burying him, returned to his house and sat mourning for him
many days and nights. But behold, certain of his friends came
in to him and said to him, “Whoso leaveth a son like thee is not
dead; indeed, what is past is past and fled and mourning beseemeth
none but the young maid and the wife cloistered.” And
they ceased not from him till they wrought on him to enter the
Hammam and break off his mourning.——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-seventh Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when Abu
al-Husn was visited by his friends and taken to the Hammam
and persuaded to break off his mourning, he presently forgot his
father’s charge, and his head was turned by his riches; he thought
fortune would always wone with him as it was, and that wealth
would ever wax and never wane. So he ate and drank and made
merry and took his pleasure and gave gifts of gear and coin and
was profuse with gold and addrest himself up to eating fowls and
breaking the seals of wine-flasks and listening to the giggle of the
daughter of the vine, as she gurgled from the flagon and enjoying
the jingle of the singing-girls; nor did he give over this way of
life, till his wealth was wasted and the case worsened and all his
goods went from him and he bit his hands<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2357" id="noteref-2357" epub:type="noteref">2357</a> in bitter penitence.
For of a truth he had nothing left, after that which he had squandered,
but a concubine, a slave-girl whom his father had bequeathed
to him with the rest of his estate: and she had no equal in beauty
and loveliness and brightness and liveliness and symmetric stature
and perfect grace. She was past mistress in every manner of arts
and accomplishments and endowed with many excellences, surpassing
all the folk of her age and time. She was grown more
notorious than a way-mark,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2358" id="noteref-2358" epub:type="noteref">2358</a> for her seductive genius, and outdid
the fair both in theory and practice, and she was noted for her
swimming gait, flexile and delicate, albeit she was full five feet
in height and by all the boons of fortune deckt and dight, with
strait arched brows twain, as they were the crescent moon of
Sha’abán,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2359" id="noteref-2359" epub:type="noteref">2359</a> and eyes like gazelles’ eyne; and nose like the edge
of scymitar fine and cheeks like anemones of blood-red shine;
and mouth like Solomon’s seal and sign and teeth like necklaces
of pearls in line; and navel holding an ounce of oil of benzoin
and waist more slender than his body whom love hath wasted
and whom concealment hath made sick with pine and hind parts
heavier than two hills of sand; briefly she was a volume of charms
after his saying who saith:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Her fair shape ravisheth, if face to face she did appear, ✿ And if she turn, for severance from her she slayeth sheer.</div>
      <div class="line">Sun-like, full-moon-like, sapling-like, unto her character ✿ Estrangement no wise appertains nor cruelty austere.</div>
      <div class="line">Under the bosom of her shift the garths of Eden are ✿ And the full-moon revolveth still upon her neck-rings’ sphere.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2360" id="noteref-2360" epub:type="noteref">2360</a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>She seemed a full moon rising and a gazelle browsing, a girl of
nine plus five<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2361" id="noteref-2361" epub:type="noteref">2361</a> shaming the moon and sun, even as saith of her
the sayer eloquent and ingenious:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Semblance of full-moon Heaven bore, ✿ When five and five are conjoined by four;</div>
      <div class="line">‘Tis not my sin if she made of me ✿ Its like when it riseth horizon o’er.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2362" id="noteref-2362" epub:type="noteref">2362</a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>Clean of skin, odoriferous of breath, it seemed as if she were of
fire fashioned and of crystal moulded; rose-red was the cheek of
her and perfect the shape and form of her; even as one saith of
her, describing her:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Scented with sandal<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2363" id="noteref-2363" epub:type="noteref">2363</a> and musk, right proudly doth she go, ✿ With gold and rose and saffron-colour aglow.</div>
      <div class="line">A flower in a garden she is, a pearl in an ouch of gold ✿ Or an image in chapel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2364" id="noteref-2364" epub:type="noteref">2364</a> set for worship of high and low.</div>
      <div class="line">Slender and shapely she is; vivacity bids her arise, ✿ But the weight of her hips says, “Sit, or softly and slowly go.”</div>
      <div class="line">Whenas her favours I seek and sue for my heart’s desire, ✿ “Be gracious,” her beauty says; but her coquetry answers, “No.”</div>
      <div class="line">Glory to Him who made beauty her portion, and that ✿ Of her lover to be the prate of the censurers, heigho!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2365" id="noteref-2365" epub:type="noteref">2365</a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>She captivated all who saw her, with the excellence of her beauty
and the sweetness of her smile,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2366" id="noteref-2366" epub:type="noteref">2366</a> and shot them down with the
shafts she launched from her eyes; and withal she was eloquent
of speech and excellently skilled in verse. Now when Abu al-Husn
had squandered all his gold, and his ill-plight all could
behold, and there remained to him naught save this slave-girl, he
abode three days without tasting meat or taking rest in sleep, and
the handmaid said to him, “O my lord, carry me to the Commander
of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid,”——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-eighth Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that quoth the
slave-girl to her master, “O my lord, carry me to Harun al-Rashid,
fifth of the sons of Abbas, and seek of him to my price ten
thousand dinars. If he deem me dear, say to him:—O Prince of
True Believers, my handmaid is worth more than this: do but
prove her, and her value will be magnified in thine eyes; for this
slave-girl hath not her equal, and she were unfit to any but thou.”
And she added, “Beware, O my lord, of selling me at less than
the sum I have named; indeed ‘tis but little for the like of me.”
Now her owner knew not her worth nor that she had no equal in
her day; but he carried her to the Caliph and set her in the presence
and repeated what she had bidden him say. The Caliph
asked her, “What is thy name?”; to which she answered, “My
name is Tawaddud.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2367" id="noteref-2367" epub:type="noteref">2367</a> He then enquired, “O Tawaddud, in what
branches of knowledge dost thou excel?”; and she replied, “O
my lord, I am versed in syntax and poetry and jurisprudence and
exegesis and philosophy; and I am skilled in music and the
knowledge of the Divine ordinances and in arithmetic and
geodesy and geometry and the fables of the ancients. I know
the Sublime Koran by heart and have read it according to the
seven, the ten and the fourteen modes. I know the number of
its chapters and versets and sections and words; and its halves and
fourths and eighths and tenths; the number of prostrations which
occur in it and the sum total of its letters; and I know what there
is in it of abrogating and abrogated<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2368" id="noteref-2368" epub:type="noteref">2368</a>; also what parts of it were
revealed at Al-Medinah and what at Meccah and the cause of the
different revelations. I know the Holy Traditions of the Apostle’s
sayings, historical and legendary, the established and those whose
ascription is doubtful; and I have studied the exact sciences,
geometry and philosophy and medicine and logic and rhetoric and
composition; and I have learnt many things by rote and am passionately
fond of poetry. I can play the lute and know its gamut
and notes and notation and the crescendo and diminuendo. If I
sing and dance, I seduce, and if I dress and scent myself, I slay.
In fine, I have reached a pitch of perfection such as can be estimated
only by those of them who are firmly rooted in knowledge.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2369" id="noteref-2369" epub:type="noteref">2369</a>
Now when the Caliph heard these words spoken by one
so young, he wondered at her eloquence, and turning to Abu al-Husn,
said, “I will summon those who shall discuss with her all
she claimeth to know; if she answer correctly, I will give thee the
price thou askest for her and more; and if not, thou art fitter to
have her than I.” “With gladness and goodly gree, O Commander
of the Faithful,” replied Abu al-Husn. So the Caliph wrote to
the Viceroy of Bassorah, to send him Ibrahim bin Siyyár the
prosodist, who was the first man of his day in argument and eloquence
and poetry and logic, and bade him bring with him readers
of the Koran and learned doctors of the law and physicians and
astrologers and scientists and mathematicians and philosophers;
and Ibrahim was more learned than all. In a little while they
arrived at the palace of the Caliphate, knowing not what was to
do, and the Caliph sent for them to his sitting-chamber and ordered
them to be seated. So they sat down and he bade bring the damsel
Tawaddud, who came and unveiling, showed herself, as she were
a sparkling star.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2370" id="noteref-2370" epub:type="noteref">2370</a> The Caliph set her a stool of gold; and she
saluted, and speaking with an eloquent tongue, said, “O Commander
of the Faithful, bid the Olema and the doctors of law and
leaches and astrologers and scientists and mathematicians and all
here present contend with me in argument.” So he said to them,
“I desire of you that ye dispute with this damsel on the things of
her faith, and stultify her argument in all she advanceth;” and
they answered, saying, “We hear and we obey Allah and thee, O
Commander of the Faithful.” Upon this Tawaddud bowed her
head and said, “Which of you is the doctor of the law, the scholar,
versed in the readings of the Koran and in the Traditions?”
Quoth one of them, “I am the man thou seekest.” Quoth she,
“Then ask me of what thou wilt.” Said the doctor, “Hast thou
read the precious book of Allah and dost thou know its cancelling
and cancelled parts and hast thou meditated its versets and
its letters?” “Yes,” answered she. “Then,” said he, “I will
proceed to question thee of the obligations and the immutable
ordinances: so tell me of these, O damsel, and who is thy Lord,
who thy prophet, who thy Guide, what is thy point of fronting in
prayer, and who be thy brethren? Also what thy spiritual path
and what thy highway?” Whereto she replied, “Allah is my
Lord, and Mohammed (whom Allah save and assain!) my prophet,
and the Koran is my guide and the Ka’abah my fronting; and
the True-believers are my brethren. The practice of good is my
path and the Sunnah my highway.” The Caliph again marvelled
at her words so eloquently spoken by one so young; and the
doctor pursued, “O damsel, with what do we know Almighty
Allah?” Said she, “With the understanding.” Said he, “And
what is the understanding?” Quoth she, “It is of two kinds,
natural and acquired.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased saying her permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Thirty-ninth Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the damsel
continued, “The understanding is of two kinds, natural and
acquired. The natural is that which Allah (to whom be honour
and glory!) created for the right direction of His servants after
His will; and the acquired is that which men accomplish by dint
of study and fair knowledge.” He rejoined, “Thou hast answered
well. (¿) Where is the seat of the understanding?”—Allah
casteth it in the heart whence its lustrous beams ascend to the
brain and there become fixed. (¿) “How knowest thou the
Prophet of Allah?”—By the reading of Allah’s Holy Book and
by signs and proofs and portents and miracles! (¿) “What are
the obligations and the immutable ordinances?”—The obligations
are five, (1) Testification that there is no iláh<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2371" id="noteref-2371" epub:type="noteref">2371</a> but Allah, no god
but <em>the</em> God alone and One, which for partner hath none, and
that Mohammed is His servant and His apostle. (2) The
standing in prayers.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2372" id="noteref-2372" epub:type="noteref">2372</a> (3) The payment of the poor-rate. (4)
Fasting Ramazan. (5) The Pilgrimage to Allah’s Holy House
for all to whom the journey is possible. The immutable ordinances
are four; to wit, night and day and sun and moon, the
which build up life and hope; nor any son of Adam wotteth if
they will be destroyed on the Day of Judgment. (¿) “What are
the obligatory observances of the Faith?”—They are five, prayer,
almsgiving, fasting, pilgrimage, fighting for the Faith and abstinence
from the forbidden. (¿) “Why dost thou stand up to
pray?”—To express the devout intent of the slave acknowledging
the Deity. (¿) “What are the obligatory conditions which precede
standing in prayer?”—Purification, covering the shame,
avoidance of soiled clothes, standing on a clean place, fronting the
Ka’abah, an upright posture, the intent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2373" id="noteref-2373" epub:type="noteref">2373</a> and the pronouncing
“Allaho Akbar” of prohibition.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2374" id="noteref-2374" epub:type="noteref">2374</a> (¿) “With what shouldest thou
go forth from thy house to pray?”—With the intent of worship
mentally pronounced. (¿) “With what intent shouldest thou
enter the mosque?”—With an intent of service. (¿) “Why do we
front the Kiblah<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2375" id="noteref-2375" epub:type="noteref">2375</a>?”—In obedience to three Divine orders and one
Traditional ordinance. (¿) “What are the beginning, the consecration
and the end of prayer?”—Purification beginneth prayer,
saying the Allaho Akbar of prohibition consecrateth, and the
salutation endeth prayer. (¿) “What deserveth he who neglecteth
prayer?”—It is reported, among the authentic Traditions of the
Prophet, that he said, “Whoso neglecteth prayer wilfully and
purposely hath no part in Al-Islam.”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fortieth Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that after the
damsel had repeated the words of that Holy Tradition the doctor
cried, “Thou hast replied aright: now say me, what is prayer?”—Prayer
is communion between the slave and his lord, and in it
are ten virtues; (1) it illumineth the heart; (2) it maketh the face
shine; (3) it pleaseth the Compassionate One; (4) it angereth
Satan; (5) it conjureth calamity; (6) it wardeth off the mischief
of enemies; (7) it multiplieth mercy; (8) it forfendeth vengeance
and punishment; (9) it bringeth the slave nigh unto his lord; and
(10) it restraineth from lewdness and frowardness. Hence it is
one of the absolute requisites and obligatory ordinances and the
pillar of the Faith. (¿) “What is the key of prayer?”—Wuzú or
the lesser ablution. (¿) “What is the key to the lesser ablution?”—Intention
and naming the Almighty. (¿) “What is the key of
naming the Almighty?”—Assured faith. (¿) “What is the key
of faith?”—Trust in the Lord. (¿) “What is the key of trust in
the Lord?”—Hope. (¿) “What is the key of hope?”—Obedience.
(¿) “What is the key of obedience?”—The confession of the Unity
and the acknowledgment of the divinity of Allah. (¿) “What are
the Divine ordinances of Wuzu, the minor ablution?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2376" id="noteref-2376" epub:type="noteref">2376</a>—They are
six, according to the canon of the Imam al-Sháfi’í Mohammed bin
Idris (of whom Allah accept!); (1) intent while washing the face;
(2) washing the face; (3) washing the hands and fore-arms; (4)
wiping part of the head; (5) washing the feet and heels; and
(6) observing due order.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2377" id="noteref-2377" epub:type="noteref">2377</a> And the traditional statutes are ten,
(1) nomination; (2) and washing the hands before putting them
into the water-pot; (3) and mouth-rinsing; (4) and snuffing;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2378" id="noteref-2378" epub:type="noteref">2378</a>
(5) and wiping the whole head; (6) and wetting the ears within
and without with fresh water; (7) and separating a thick beard;
(8) and separating the fingers and toes;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2379" id="noteref-2379" epub:type="noteref">2379</a> (9) and washing the right
foot before the left and (10) doing each of these thrice and all in
unbroken order. When the minor ablution is ended, the worshipper
should say, I testify that there is no god but <em>the</em> God, the One, which
for partner hath none, and I testify that Mohammed is His servant
and His apostle. O my Allah, make me of those who repent and
in purity are permanent! Glory to Thee, O my God, and in Thy
praise I bear witness, that there is no god save Thou! I crave
pardon of Thee and I repent to Thee! For it is reported, in the
Holy Traditions, that the Prophet (whom Allah bless and preserve!)
said of this prayer:—Whoso endeth every ablution with
this prayer, the eight gates of Paradise are open to him; he shall
enter at which he pleaseth. (¿) “When a man purposeth ablution,
what betideth him from the angels and the devils?”—When a man
prepareth for ablution, the angels come and stand on his right and
the devils on his left hand.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2380" id="noteref-2380" epub:type="noteref">2380</a> If he name Almighty Allah at the
beginning of the ablution, the devils flee from him and the angels
hover over him with a pavilion of light, having four ropes, to each
an angel glorifying Allah and craving pardon for him, so long as
he remaineth silent or calleth upon the name of Allah. But if he
omit to begin washing with naming Allah (to whom belong might
and majesty!), neither remain silent, the devils take command of
him; and the angels depart from him and Satan whispereth evil
thoughts unto him, till he fall into doubt and come short in his
ablution. For (quoth he on whom be blessing and peace!):—A
perfect ablution driveth away Satan and assureth against the
tyranny of the Sultan; and again quoth he:—If calamity befal
one who is not pure by ablution; verily and assuredly let him
blame none but himself. (¿) “What should a man do when he
awaketh from sleep?”—He should wash his hands thrice, before
putting them into the water vessel. (¿) “What are the Koranic
and traditional orders anent Ghusl, the complete ablution<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2381" id="noteref-2381" epub:type="noteref">2381</a>?”—The
divine ordinances are intent and ‘crowning’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2382" id="noteref-2382" epub:type="noteref">2382</a> the whole body
with water, that is, the liquid shall come at every part of the hair
and skin. Now the traditional ordinances are the minor ablution
as preliminary; rubbing the body; separating the hair and deferring
in words<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2383" id="noteref-2383" epub:type="noteref">2383</a> the washing of the feet till the end of the
ablution.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Forty-first Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel had recounted to the doctor what were the divine and traditional
orders anent Ghusl or total ablution, quoth he, “Thou
hast replied aright: now tell me what are the occasions for Tayammum,
or making the ablution with sand and dust; and what are the
ordinances thereof, divine and human?”—The reasons are seven,
viz., want of water; fear lest water lack; need thereto; going astray
on a march; sickness; having broken bones in splints and having
open wounds.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2384" id="noteref-2384" epub:type="noteref">2384</a> As for its ordinances, the divine number four, viz.,
intent, dust, clapping it to the face and clapping it upon the hands;
and the human number two, nomination and preferring the right
before the left hand. (¿) “What are the conditions, the pillars or
essentials, and the traditional statutes of prayer?”—The conditions
are five, (1) purification of the members; (2) covering of the privy
parts; (3) observing the proper hours, either of certainty or to the
best of one’s belief; (4) fronting the Kiblah; and (5) standing on
a clean place. The pillars or essentials number twelve, (1) intent;
(2) the Takbír or magnification of prohibition; (3) standing when
able to stand<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2385" id="noteref-2385" epub:type="noteref">2385</a>; (4) repeating the Fatihah or opening chapter of
the Koran and saying, In the name of Allah, the Compassionating
the Compassionate! with a verse thereof according to the canon
of the Imam Al-Shafi’i; (5) bowing the body and keeping it
bowed; (6) returning to the upright posture and so remaining
for the time requisite; (7) prostration and permanence therein;
(8) sitting between two prostrations and permanence therein; (9)
repeating the latter profession of the Faith and sitting up therefor;
(10) invoking benediction on the Prophet (whom Allah bless
and preserve!); (11) the first Salutation,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2386" id="noteref-2386" epub:type="noteref">2386</a> and (12) the intent of
making an end of prayer expressed in words. But the traditional
statutes are the call to prayer; the standing posture; raising the
hands (to either side of the face) whilst pronouncing the prohibition;
uttering the magnification before reciting the Fatihah;
seeking refuge with Allah<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2387" id="noteref-2387" epub:type="noteref">2387</a>; saying, ‘Amen’; repeating the chapter
of the Koran after the Fatihah, repeating the magnifications
during change of posture; saying, May Allah hear him who
praiseth Him! and O our Lord, to Thee be the praise!; praying
aloud in the proper place<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2388" id="noteref-2388" epub:type="noteref">2388</a> and praying under the breath
prayers so prescribed; the first profession of unity and sitting
up thereto; blessing the Prophet therein; blessing his family in
the latter profession and the second Salutation. (¿) “On what
is the Zakát or obligatory poor-rate taxable?”—On gold and
silver and camels and oxen and sheep and wheat and barley
and holcus and millet and beans and vetches and rice and raisins
and dates. (¿) “What is the Zakát or poor-rate on gold?”—Below
twenty miskals or dinars, nothing; but on that amount
half a dinar for every score and so on proportionally.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2389" id="noteref-2389" epub:type="noteref">2389</a> (¿) “On
silver?”—Under two hundred dirhams nothing, then five dirhams
on every two hundred and so forth. (¿) “On camels?”—For every
five, an ewe, or for every twenty-five a pregnant camel. (¿) “On
sheep?”—An ewe for every forty head. (¿) “What are the ordinances
of the Ramazan Fast?”—The Koranic are intent; abstinence
from eating, drinking and carnal copulation, and the stoppage
of vomiting. It is incumbent on all who submit to the Law,
save women in their courses and forty days after childbirth; and
it becomes obligatory on sight of the new moon or on news of its
appearance, brought by a trustworthy person and commending
itself as truth to the hearer’s heart; and among its requisites is
that the intent be pronounced at nightfall. The traditional ordinances
of fasting are, hastening to break the fast at sundown;
deferring the fore dawn meal,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2390" id="noteref-2390" epub:type="noteref">2390</a> and abstaining from speech, save
for good works and for calling on the name of Allah and reciting
the Koran. (¿) “What things vitiate not the fast?”—The use of
unguents and eye-powders and the dust of the road and the undesigned
swallowing of saliva and the emission of seed in nocturnal
pollution or at the sight of a strange woman and blooding and
cupping; none of these things vitiates the fast. (¿) “What are
the prayers of the two great annual Festivals?”—Two one-bow
prayers, which be a traditional ordinance, without call to prayer or
standing up to pronounce the call;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2391" id="noteref-2391" epub:type="noteref">2391</a> but let the Moslem say, Prayer
is a collector of all folk!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2392" id="noteref-2392" epub:type="noteref">2392</a> and pronounce ‘Allaho Akbar’ seven times
in the first prayer, besides the Takbir of prohibition; and, in the
second, five times, besides the magnification of rising up (according
to the doctrine of the Imam Al-Shafi’i, on whom Allah have
mercy!) and make the profession of the Faith.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Forty-second Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
the damsel had answered the doctor anent the Festival-prayers,
quoth he, “Thou hast replied aright: now tell me what are the
prayers prescribed on the occasion of an eclipse of the sun or
moon?”—Two one-bow prayers without call to prayer or standing
thereto by the worshipper, who shall make in each two-bow
prayer double standing up and double inclinations and two-fold
prostrations, then sit and testify and salute. (¿) “What is the
ritual of prayer for rain?”—Two one-bow prayers without call to
prayer or standing thereto; then shall the Moslem make the profession
and salute. Moreover the Imam shall deliver an exhortation
and ask pardon of Allah, in place of the magnification, as
in the two sermons of the Festivals and turn his mantle upper
edge downwards and pray and supplicate. (¿) “What are the
Witr, the additional or occasional prayers?”—The least is a
one-bow prayer and the most eleven. (¿) “What is the forenoon
prayer?”—At least, two one-bow prayers and at most, twelve.
(¿) “What hast thou to say of the I’itikáf or retreat<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2393" id="noteref-2393" epub:type="noteref">2393</a>?”—It is a
matter of traditional ordinance. (¿) “What are its conditions?”—(1)
intent; (2) not leaving the mosque save of necessity; (3)
not having to do with a woman; (4) fasting; and (5) abstaining
from speech. (¿) “Under what conditions is the Hajj or Pilgrimage<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2394" id="noteref-2394" epub:type="noteref">2394</a>
obligatory?”—Manhood, and understanding and being a
Moslem and practicability; in which case it is obligatory on
all, once before death. (¿) “What are the Koranic statutes of
the Pilgrimage?”—(1) The Ihrám or pilgrim’s habit; (2) the
standing at Arafat; (3) circumambulating the Ka’abah; (4)
running between Safá and Marwah<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2395" id="noteref-2395" epub:type="noteref">2395</a>; and (5) shaving or clipping
the hair. (¿) “What are the Koranic statutes of the ‘Umrah<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2396" id="noteref-2396" epub:type="noteref">2396</a>
or lesser pilgrimage?”—Assuming the pilgrim’s habit and
compassing and running. (¿) “What are the Koranic ordinances
of the assumption of the pilgrim’s habit?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2397" id="noteref-2397" epub:type="noteref">2397</a>—Doffing
sewn garments, forswearing perfume and ceasing to shave
the head or pare the nails, and avoiding the killing of game,
and eschewing carnal copulation. (¿) “What are the traditional
statutes of the pilgrimage?”—(1) The crying out “Labbay’ka,
Adsum, Here am I, O our Lord, here am I!”;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2398" id="noteref-2398" epub:type="noteref">2398</a> (2) the
Ka’abah-circuitings<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2399" id="noteref-2399" epub:type="noteref">2399</a> of arrival and departure; (3) the passing
the night at the Mosque of Muzdalifah and in the valley of
Mina, and (4) the lapidation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2400" id="noteref-2400" epub:type="noteref">2400</a> (¿) “What is the Jihád or Holy
War and its essentials?”—Its essentials are (1) the descent of the
Infidels upon us; (2) the presence of the Imam; (3) a state of
preparation and (4) firmness in meeting the foe. Its traditional
ordinance is incital to battle, in that the Most High hath said,
“O thou my Prophet, incite the faithful to fight!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2401" id="noteref-2401" epub:type="noteref">2401</a> (¿) “What
are the ordinances of buying and selling?”—The Koranic are
(1) offer and acceptance and (2) if the thing sold be a white
slave, by whom one profiteth, all possible endeavour to convert
him to Al-Islam; and (3) to abstain from usury: the traditional
are making void<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2402" id="noteref-2402" epub:type="noteref">2402</a> and option before not after separating, according
to his saying (whom Allah bless and preserve!), “The parties
to a sale shall have the option of cancelling or altering terms
whilst they are yet unseparated.” (¿) “What is it forbidden to
sell for what?”—On this point I mind me of an authentic
tradition, reported by Náf’i<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2403" id="noteref-2403" epub:type="noteref">2403</a> of the Apostle of Allah, that he
forbade the barter of dried dates for fresh and fresh figs for dry
and jerked for fresh meat and cream for clarified butter; in fine,
all eatables of one and the same kind, it is unlawful to buy or
barter some for other some.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2404" id="noteref-2404" epub:type="noteref">2404</a> Now when the doctor of law heard
her words and knew that she was wit-keen, penetrative, ingenious
and learned in jurisprudence and the Traditions and the interpretation
of the Koran and what not else, he said in his mind,
“Needs must I manœuvre with her, that I may overcome her in
the assembly of the Commander of the Faithful.” So he said
to her, “O damsel, what is the lexicographical meaning of
Wuzú?” And she answered, “Philologically it signifieth cleanliness
and freedom from impurities.” (¿) “And of Salát or prayer?”—An
invocation of good. (¿) “And of Ghusl?”—Purification.
(¿) “And of Saum or fasting?”—Abstention. (¿) “And
of Zakát?”—Increase. (¿) “And of Hajj or pilgrimage?”—Visitation.
(¿) “And of Jihád?”—Repelling. With this the
doctor’s arguments were cut off,——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Forty-third Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
doctor’s arguments were cut off, he rose to his feet and said, “Bear
witness against me, O Commander of the Faithful, that this
damsel is more learned in the Law than I am.” Quoth she,
“I will ask thee somewhat, which do thou answer me speedily,
an thou be indeed a learned man.” Quoth he, “Say on;” and
she said, “What are the arrows of the Faith?” Answered he,
“They number ten, (1) Testification, that is, religion; (2) Prayer,
that is, the covenant; (3) Alms, that is, purification; (4) Fasting,
that is, defensive armour; (5) Pilgrimage, that is, the Law; (6)
Fighting for the Faith, that is, a general duty; (7) Bidding to
beneficence and (8) Forbidding from frowardness, both of which
are a man’s honour; (9) Commune,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2405" id="noteref-2405" epub:type="noteref">2405</a> that is, sociableness of the
Faithful; and (10) Seeking knowledge, that is, the praiseworthy
path.” She rejoined, “Thou hast replied aright and now
remaineth but one question, What be the roots or fundamentals of
Al-Islam?” He said, “They are four, sincerity of belief, truth of
intent, observance of the lawful limit and keeping the covenant.”
Then said she, “I have one more question to ask thee, which if
thou answer, it is well; else, I will take thy clothes.” Quoth he,
“Speak, O damsel;” and she said, “What are the branches or
superstructure of Al-Islam?” But he was silent awhile and made
no reply: so she cried, “Doff thy clothes and I will expound them
to thee.” Quoth the Caliph “Expound them, and I will make
him put off his clothes for thee.” She said, “There are two-and-twenty
branches; (1) holding fast to the Book of Allah the Most
Highest; (2) taking example by His Apostle (whom Allah bless
and preserve!); (3) abstaining from evil doing; (4) eating what is
lawful and (5) avoiding what is unlawful; (6) restitution of things
wrongfully taken; (7) repentance; (8) knowledge of the Law; (9)
love of the Friend,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2406" id="noteref-2406" epub:type="noteref">2406</a> (10) and of the followers of the true Revelation;
(11) belief in the apostles of Al-Islam; (12) fear of apostacy;
(13) preparation for departing this life; (14) force of conviction;
(15) mercy on all possible occasions; (16) strength in time of
weakness; (17) patience under trials; (18) knowledge of Allah
Almighty and (19) of what His Prophet hath made known to us;
(20) thwarting Iblis the accursed; (21) striving earnestly against
the lusts of the soul and warring them down, and (22) devotion to
the one God.” Now when the Commander of the Faithful heard
her words, he bade the professor put off his clothes and hooded
turband; and so did that doctor and went forth, beaten and confounded,
from the Caliph’s presence. Thereupon another man
stood up and said to her, “O damsel, hear a few questions from
me.” Quoth she, “Say on;” and he asked, “What are the conditions
of purchase by advance?” whereto she answered, “That
the price be fixed, the kind be fixed and the period of delivery be
fixed and known.” (¿) “What are the Koranic and the traditional
canons of eating?”—The confession that Allah Almighty provideth
the eater and giveth him meat and drink, with thanksgiving
to Him therefor. (¿) “What is thanksgiving?”—The use by the
creature of that which the Creator vouchsafeth to him, according
as it was created for the creature. (¿) “What are the traditional
canons of eating?”—The Bismillah<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2407" id="noteref-2407" epub:type="noteref">2407</a> and washing both hands;
sitting on the left of the hind part; eating with three fingers, and
eating of that which hath been duly masticated.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2408" id="noteref-2408" epub:type="noteref">2408</a> (¿) “What are
good manners in eating?”—Taking small mouthfuls and looking
little at one’s table-companion.——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Forty-fourth Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel had answered concerning good manners in eating, the
doctor who was trying her, rejoined, “Thou hast replied aright.
Now tell me what are the stays of the heart and their supports?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2409" id="noteref-2409" epub:type="noteref">2409</a>—The
stays and supports both number three; (1) holding fast to
the Faith, the support whereof is the shunning of infidelity; (2)
holding fast to the Traditional Law, and its support the shunning
of innovation; and (3) holding fast to obedience, and its support
the shunning of disobedience. (¿) “What are the conditions of
Wuzu?”—(1) being a Moslem; (2) discernment of good and evil;
(3) purity of the water, and (4) absence of material or religious
impediments. (¿) “What is belief?”—It is divided into nine
parts, (1) belief in the One worshipped; (2) belief in the condition
of slavery of the worshipper; (3) belief in the personality of the
Deity; (4) belief in the Two Handfuls;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2410" id="noteref-2410" epub:type="noteref">2410</a> (5) belief in Providence
which allotteth to man his lot; (6) belief in the Abrogating and
(7) in the Abrogated; (8) belief in Allah, His angels and apostles;
and (9) in fore-ordained Fate, general and individual, its good and
ill, its sweet and bitter. (¿) “What three things do away other
three?”—It is told of Sufyán al-Saurí<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2411" id="noteref-2411" epub:type="noteref">2411</a> that he said, “Three things
do away with other three. Making light of the pious doth away
the future life, making light of Kings doth away this life, and,
making light of expenditure doth away wealth.” (¿) “What are
the keys of the heavens, and how many gates have they?”—Quoth
Almighty Allah, “And the heaven shall be opened and
be full of portals;”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2412" id="noteref-2412" epub:type="noteref">2412</a> and quoth he whom Allah bless and preserve!,
“None knoweth the number of the gates of heavens, save
He who created the heavens, and there is no son of Adam but
hath two gates allotted to him in the heavens, one whereby his
daily bread descendeth and another wherethrough his works
ascend. The first gate is not closed, save when his term of life
cometh to an end, nor the gate of works, good and evil, till his
soul ascend for judgment.” (¿) “Tell me of a thing and a half
thing and a no-thing.”—The thing is the Moslem; the half thing
the hypocrite,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2413" id="noteref-2413" epub:type="noteref">2413</a> and the no-thing the miscreant. (¿) “Tell me of
various kinds of hearts.”—There is the whole heart, the sick heart,
the contrite heart, the vowed heart and the enlightened heart.
Now the whole heart is that of Abraham, the Friend of Allah;
the sick heart is that of the Unbeliever in Al-Islam; the contrite
heart is that of the pious who fear the Lord; the vowed heart is
that of our Lord Mohammed (whom Allah bless and keep!) and
the illuminated heart is that of his followers. Furthermore, the
hearts of learned Olema are of three kinds, the heart which is
in love with this world; the heart which loveth the next world,
and the heart which loveth its Lord; and it is said that hearts
are three, the suspended, that of the infidel; the non-existent,
that of the hypocrite; and the constant, that of the True-believer.
Moreover, it is said that the firm heart is of three kinds, viz., the
heart dilated with light and faith, the heart wounded with fear of
estrangement and the heart which feareth to be forsaken of its
Supreme Friend.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day
and ceased saying her permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Forty-fifth Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
second doctor declared, “Thou hast said well,” quoth she to the
Caliph, “O Commander of the Faithful, he hath questioned me,
till he is weary, and now I will ask of him two questions. If
he answer them both, it is well; and if not, I will take his clothes
and he shall wend in peace.” Quoth the doctor, “Ask me what
thou wilt,” and she said, “What sayest thou religion is?” Answered
he, “Religion is confession of Faith with the tongue and
conviction with the heart and correspondent action with the
members. He (upon whom be blessings and peace!) hath said:—The
believer is not perfect in belief, except he perfect himself in
five qualities, namely, trust in Allah,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2414" id="noteref-2414" epub:type="noteref">2414</a> committal of his affair to
Allah, submission to the commands of Allah, acquiescence in the
decrees of Allah; and that all he doth be done for sake of Allah;
so is he of those who are acceptable to the Deity, and who give
to Him and withhold for Him; and such man is perfect in belief.”
Then said she, “What is the Divine ordinance of ordinances and
the ordinance which is the initiator of all ordinances and that of
which all others stand in need and that which comprehendeth all
others; and what is the traditional ordinance that entereth into
the Koranic, and the prophetic practice whereby the Divine is
completed?” But he was silent and made no reply; whereupon
the Caliph bade her expound and ordered him to doff his clothes
and give them to her. Said she, “O doctor, the Koranic ordinance
of ordinances is the knowledge of Almighty Allah; that,
which is the initiative of all others, is the testifying there is no
god but <em>the</em> God and Mohammed is the Apostle of God; that, of
which all others have need, is the Wuzu-ablution; that, which
compriseth all others, is the Ghusl-ablution from defilement<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2415" id="noteref-2415" epub:type="noteref">2415</a>: the
Traditional ordinance that entereth into the Koranic, is the
separation of the fingers and the thick beard;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2416" id="noteref-2416" epub:type="noteref">2416</a> and that, wherewith
all Koranic ordinances are completed, is circumcision.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2417" id="noteref-2417" epub:type="noteref">2417</a>
Therewith was made manifest the defeat of the doctor, who rose
to his feet and said, “I call Allah to witness, O Commander of
the Faithful, that this damsel is more learned than I in theology
and what pertaineth to the Law.” So saying, he put off his
clothes and went away ignominiously worsted. Then she turned
to the rest of the learned men present and said, “O masters,
which of you is the Koranist, the reader and reciter of the
Koran, versed in the seven readings and in syntax and in lexicography?”
Thereupon a professor arose and, seating himself
before her, said, “Hast thou read the Book of Almighty Allah
and made thyself thoroughly acquainted with its signs, that is its
verses, and its abrogating parts and abrogated portions, its unequivocal
commands and its ambiguous; and the difference of its
revelations, Meccan and Medinan? Dost thou understand its
interpretation and hast thou studied it, according to the various
traditions and origins?” “Yes,” answered she; and he said,
“What then is the number of its chapters, how many are the
decades and versets, how many words and how many letters and
how many acts of prostration and how many prophets and how
many chapters are Medinan and how many are Meccan and how
many birds are mentioned in it?” Replied she, “O my lord, its
chapters are an hundred and fourteen, whereof seventy were
revealed at Meccah and forty-four at Al-Medinah; and it containeth
six hundred and twenty-one decades; six thousand three
hundred and thirty-six versets;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2418" id="noteref-2418" epub:type="noteref">2418</a> seventy-nine thousand four hundred
and thirty-nine words and three hundred and twenty-three
thousand and six hundred and seventy letters; and to the reader
thereof, for every letter, are given ten benefits. The acts of prostration
it compriseth are fourteen.”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now When it Was the Four Hundred and Forty-sixth Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
professor of Koranic exegesis questioned the damsel, she continued,
“As regards the Prophets named in the Book there be
five-and-twenty, to wit, Adam, Noah,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2419" id="noteref-2419" epub:type="noteref">2419</a> Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac,
Jacob, Joseph, Lot, Elisha, Jonah, Salih,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2420" id="noteref-2420" epub:type="noteref">2420</a> or Heber, Húd,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2421" id="noteref-2421" epub:type="noteref">2421</a> Shua’yb
or Jethro,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2422" id="noteref-2422" epub:type="noteref">2422</a> David, Solomon, Zú’l-kafl or Joshua, Idrís, Elias,
Yahyá or John the Baptist, Zacharias, Job, Moses, Aaron, Jesus and
Mohammed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2423" id="noteref-2423" epub:type="noteref">2423</a> the peace of Allah and His blessing be on them
all! Moreover, nine flying things are mentioned in the Koran,
namely, the gnat, the bee, the fly, the ant, the hoopoe, the crow,
the locust, the swallow and the bird of Jesus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2424" id="noteref-2424" epub:type="noteref">2424</a> (on whom be
peace!), to wit, the bat.” (¿) “Which is the most excellent chapter
of the Koran?”—That of The Cow.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2425" id="noteref-2425" epub:type="noteref">2425</a> (¿) “Which is the most
magnificent verse?”—That of The Throne; it hath fifty words,
bearing in each fifty blessings. (¿) “What sign or verse hath
in it nine signs or wonders?”—That in which quoth Allah
Almighty, “Verily, in the creation of the Heaven and the Earth;
and in the vicissitude of night, and day; and in the ship which
saileth through the sea laden with what is profitable for mankind;
and in the rain-water which God sendeth down from Heaven,
quickening thereby the dead ground and replenishing the same
with all sorts of cattle; and in the change of winds and in the
clouds that are compelled to do service between the Heaven and
the Earth;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2426" id="noteref-2426" epub:type="noteref">2426</a>—are signs to people of understanding.” (¿) “Which
verse is the most just?”—That in which Allah saith, “Verily,
Allah enjoineth justice and the doing of good, and the giving
unto kindred what shall be necessary; and He forbiddeth wickedness
and iniquity and oppression.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2427" id="noteref-2427" epub:type="noteref">2427</a> (¿) “Which is the most
greedy?”—That in which quoth Allah, “Is it that every man of
them greedeth to enter the Garden of Delight?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2428" id="noteref-2428" epub:type="noteref">2428</a> (¿) “Which
is the most hopeful?”—That in which quoth Almighty Allah,
“Say: ‘O my servants who have transgressed against your own
souls, despair not of the mercy of Allah; seeing, that Allah forgiveth
all sins; aye Gracious, Merciful is He.’”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2429" id="noteref-2429" epub:type="noteref">2429</a> (¿) “By what
school of intonation dost thou read?”—By that of the people of
Paradise, to wit, the version of Náf’i. (¿) “In which verse doth
Allah make prophets lie?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2430" id="noteref-2430" epub:type="noteref">2430</a>—In that wherein He saith, “They
(the brothers of Joseph) brought his inner garment stained with
false blood.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2431" id="noteref-2431" epub:type="noteref">2431</a> (¿) “In which doth He make unbelievers speak
the truth?”—In that wherein He saith, “The Jews say, ‘The
Christians are grounded on nothing,’ and the Christians say, ‘The
Jews are grounded on nothing’; and yet they both read the Scriptures;”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2432" id="noteref-2432" epub:type="noteref">2432</a>
and, so saying, all say sooth. (¿) “In which doth God
speak in his own person?”—In that in which he saith, “I have
not created Genii and men for any other end than that they
should serve me.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2433" id="noteref-2433" epub:type="noteref">2433</a> (¿) “In which verse do the angels speak?”—In
that which saith, “But we celebrate Thy praise and extol
Thy holiness.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2434" id="noteref-2434" epub:type="noteref">2434</a> (¿) “What sayest thou of the formula:—I seek
refuge with Allah from Satan the Stoned?”—It is obligatory
by commandment of Allah on all before reading the Koran, as
appeareth by His saying, “When thou readest the Koran, seek
refuge with Allah from Satan the Stoned.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2435" id="noteref-2435" epub:type="noteref">2435</a> (¿) “What signify
the words ‘seeking refuge’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2436" id="noteref-2436" epub:type="noteref">2436</a> and what are the variants of the
formula?”—Some say, “I take refuge with Allah the All-hearing
and All-knowing,” and others, “With Allah the Strong;” but the
best is that whereof the Sublime Koran speaketh and the Traditions
perpetuate. And he (whom Allah bless and keep!) was used
to ejaculate, “I seek refuge with Allah from Satan the Stoned.”
And quoth a Tradition, reported by Naf’i on the authority of his
adopted father, “The apostle of Allah, was wont when he rose in
the night to pray, to say aloud, Allaho Akbar; God is Most Great,
with all Majesty! Praise be to Allah abundantly! Glory to Allah
morn and even be!” Then would he say, “I seek refuge with
Allah from Satan the Stoned and from the delusions of the Devils
and their evil suggestions.” And it is told of Ibn Abbas<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2437" id="noteref-2437" epub:type="noteref">2437</a> (of
whom Allah accept!) that he said, “The first time Gabriel came
down to the Prophet with revelation he taught him the ‘seeking
refuge,’ saying:—O Mohammed, say, I seek refuge with Allah the
All-hearing and All-knowing; then say:—In the name of Allah
the Compassionating, the Compassionate! Read, in the name of
thy Lord who created;—created man of blood-clots.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2438" id="noteref-2438" epub:type="noteref">2438</a> Now
when the Koranist heard her words he marvelled at her expressions,
her eloquence, her learning, her excellence, and said, “O
damsel, what sayst thou of the verse “In the name of Allah, the
Compassionating, the Compassionate? Is it one of the verses of
the Koran?””—Yes; it is a verset of “The Ant”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2439" id="noteref-2439" epub:type="noteref">2439</a> occurring also
at the head of the first and between every two following chapters;
and there is much difference of opinion, respecting this, among the
learned.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
saying her permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now When it Was the Four Hundred and Forty-seventh Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel had told the professor concerning the difference of opinion
among the learned touching the ‘Basmalah,’ he said, “Thou hast
replied aright: now tell me why is not the formula written at the
head of the chapter of Immunity<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2440" id="noteref-2440" epub:type="noteref">2440</a>?”; and she answered, “When
this chapter was revealed from on high for the dissolution of the
alliance between the Prophet and the idolaters, He (whom Allah
bless and preserve!) sent Ali<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2441" id="noteref-2441" epub:type="noteref">2441</a> ibn Abí Tálib (whose face Allah
honour!) therewith, and he read the chapter to them, but did not
read the Basmalah.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2442" id="noteref-2442" epub:type="noteref">2442</a> (¿) “What of the excellence of the formula
and its blessing?”—It is told of the Prophet that he said, “Never is
the Basmalah pronounced over aught, but there is a blessing in it;”
and it is reported, on authority of Him (whom Allah bless and
preserve!) that the Lord of Glory swore by His glory that never
should the Basmalah be pronounced over a sick person, but he
should be healed of his sickness. Moreover, it is said that, when
Allah created the empyrean, it was agitated with an exceeding
agitation; but He wrote on it, ‘Bismillah’ and its agitation subsided.
When the formula first descended from heaven to the
Prophet, he said, “I am safe from three things, earthquake and
metamorphosis and drowning;” and indeed its boons are great
and its blessings too many to enumerate. It is told of Allah’s
Apostle that he said, “There will be brought on the Judgment-day
a man with whom He shall reckon and finding no good deed to
his account, shall order him to the Fire; but the man will cry:—O
my God, Thou hast not dealt justly by me! Then shall Allah
(to whom be honour and glory!) say, How so? and the man shall
answer, O Lord, for that Thou callest Thyself the Compassionating,
the Compassionate, yet wilt Thou punish me with the Fire!
And Allah (magnified be His Majesty!) shall reply, I did indeed
name myself the Compassionating, the Compassionate. Carry My
servant to Paradise, of My mercy, for I am the most Merciful of
the mercifuls!” (¿) “What was the origin of the use of the
Basmalah?”—When Allah sent down from Heaven the Koran,
they wrote, “In Thy name, O my God!”; when Allah revealed the
words, “Say: Call upon Allah, or call upon the Compassionating, what
days ye pray, for hath He the most excellent names,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2443" id="noteref-2443" epub:type="noteref">2443</a> they wrote,
“In the name of Allah, the Compassionating, the Compassionate;”
and, when He revealed the words, “Your God is one God, there is
no God but He, the Compassionating, the Compassionate,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2444" id="noteref-2444" epub:type="noteref">2444</a> they
wrote, “In the name of Allah, the Compassionating, the Compassionate!”
Now when the Koranist heard her reply, he hung down
his head and said to himself, “This be a marvel of marvels! How
hath this slave-girl expounded the origin of the Basmalah? But,
by Allah, needs must I go about with her and haply defeat her.”
So he asked, “Did Allah reveal the Koran all at once or at times
manifold?” She answered, “Gabriel the Faithful (on whom be
peace!) descended with it from the Lord of the Worlds upon His
Prophet Mohammed, Prince of the Apostles and Seal of the
Prophets, by detached versets; bidding and forbidding, covenanting
and comminating, and containing advices and instances in the
course of twenty years as occasion called for it.” (¿) “Which
chapter was first revealed?”—According to Ibn Abbas, that entituled
Congealed Blood:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2445" id="noteref-2445" epub:type="noteref">2445</a> and, according to Jábir bin Abdillah,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2446" id="noteref-2446" epub:type="noteref">2446</a>
that called ‘The Covered’ which preceded all others.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2447" id="noteref-2447" epub:type="noteref">2447</a> (¿) “Which
verset was the last revealed?”—That of Usury,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2448" id="noteref-2448" epub:type="noteref">2448</a> and it is also said,
the verse, “When there cometh Allah’s succour and victory.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2449" id="noteref-2449" epub:type="noteref">2449</a>——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased to say
her permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Forty-eighth Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
the damsel told the Koranist which was the last verse he said,
“Thou hast replied aright; now tell me the names of the Companions
who collected the Koran, in the lifetime of the Apostle of
Allah.” And she answered, “They were four, Ubay ibn Ka’ab,
Zayd ibn Sábit, Abú Obaydah ‘Aamir bin Jarráh, and Othmán bin
Affán,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2450" id="noteref-2450" epub:type="noteref">2450</a> (Allah accept of them one and all!)” (¿) “Who are the
readers, from whom the accepted reading of the Koran is taken?”—They
number four, Abdallah bin Mas’úd, Ubay bin Ka’ab,
Ma’az bin Jabal and Sálim bin Abdillah. (¿) “What sayest thou
of the words of the Most High, ‘That which is sacrificed to
stones’”?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2451" id="noteref-2451" epub:type="noteref">2451</a>—The stones are idols, which are set up and worshipped,
instead of Allah the Most High, and from this we seek refuge with
Allah. (¿) “What sayest thou of the words of the Most High,
Thou knowest what is in my soul, and I know not what is in Thy
soul”?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2452" id="noteref-2452" epub:type="noteref">2452</a>—They mean, “Thou knowest the truth of me and what is
in me, and I know not what is in Thee; and the proof of this are
His words,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2453" id="noteref-2453" epub:type="noteref">2453</a> ‘Thou art He who wottest the hidden things’”; and it
is said, also, “Thou knowest my essence, but I know not Thine
essence.” (¿) “What sayst thou of the words of the Most High,
‘O true believers, forbid not yourselves the good things which Allah
hath allowed you?’”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2454" id="noteref-2454" epub:type="noteref">2454</a>—My Shaykh (on whom Allah have mercy!)
told me that the Companion Al-Zahhák related:—There was a
people of the True-believers who said, “We will dock our members
masculine and don sackcloth;” whereupon this verse was revealed.
But Al-Kutádah declareth that it was revealed on account of
sundry Companions of the Apostle of Allah, namely, Ali ibn Abí
Tálib and Othmán bin Musa’ab and others, who said, “We will
geld ourselves and don hair cloth and make us monks.” (¿)
“What sayest thou of the words of the Most Highest, ‘And Allah
took Abraham for His friend’”?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2455" id="noteref-2455" epub:type="noteref">2455</a>—The friend of Allah is the needy,
the poor, and (according to another saying) he is the lover, he who
is detached from the world in the love of Allah Almighty and
in whose attachment there is no falling away. Now when the
Koranist<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2456" id="noteref-2456" epub:type="noteref">2456</a> saw her pass on in speech with the passage of the clouds
and that she stayed not in reply, he rose to his feet and said, “I take
Allah to witness, O Commander of the Faithful, that this damsel
is more learned than I in Koranic exegesis and what pertaineth
thereto.” Then said she, “I will ask thee one question, which if
thou answer it is well; but if thou answer not, I will strip off thy
clothes.” Quoth the Commander of the Faithful, “Ask on,” and
she enquired, “Which verset of the Koran hath in it three-and-twenty
Káfs, which sixteen Míms, which an hundred and forty
‘Ayns<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2457" id="noteref-2457" epub:type="noteref">2457</a> and which section<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2458" id="noteref-2458" epub:type="noteref">2458</a> lacketh the formula, ‘To Whom belong
glory and glorification and majesty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2459" id="noteref-2459" epub:type="noteref">2459</a>?’” The Koranist could not
reply, and she said to him, “Put off thy clothes.” So he doffed
them, and she continued, “O Commander of the Faithful, the
verset of the sixteen Mims is in the chapter Húd and is the saying
of the Most High, ‘It was said, O Noah, go down in peace from us,
and blessing upon thee!’;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2460" id="noteref-2460" epub:type="noteref">2460</a> that of the three-and-twenty Kafs is the
verse called of the Faith, in the chapter of The Cow; that of the
hundred and forty Ayns is in the chapter of Al-A’aráf,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2461" id="noteref-2461" epub:type="noteref">2461</a> where the
Lord saith, ‘And Moses chose seventy men of his tribe to attend
our appointed time;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2462" id="noteref-2462" epub:type="noteref">2462</a> to each man a pair of eyes.’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2463" id="noteref-2463" epub:type="noteref">2463</a> And the lesson,
which lacketh the formula, ‘To Whom be glory and glorification,’
is that which comprises the chapters, The Hour draweth nigh and
the Moon shall be cloven in twain<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2464" id="noteref-2464" epub:type="noteref">2464</a>; The Compassionate and The
Event.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2465" id="noteref-2465" epub:type="noteref">2465</a> Thereupon the professor departed in confusion.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted
say.</p>

<div></div>
<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Forty-ninth Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel defeated the Koranist and took off his clothes and sent
him away confused, then came forward the skilled physician and
said to her, “We are free of theology and come now to physiology.
Tell me, therefore, how is man made; how many veins, bones and
vertebræ are there in his body; which is the first and chief vein
and why Adam was named Adam?” She replied, “Adam was
called Adam, because of his <em>udmah</em>, that is, the wheaten colour of
his complexion and also (it is said) because he was created of the
<em>adim</em> of the earth, that is to say, of the surface-soil. His breast
was made of the earth of the Ka’abah, his head of earth from the
East and his legs of earth from the West. There were created for
him seven doors in his head, viz., the eyes, the ears, the nostrils
and the mouth, and two passages, before and behind. The eyes
were made the seat of the sight-sense, the ears the seat of the
hearing-sense, the nostrils the seat of the smell-sense, the mouth
the seat of the taste-sense and the tongue to utter what is in the
heart of man.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2466" id="noteref-2466" epub:type="noteref">2466</a> Now Adam was made of a compound of the four
elements, which be water, earth, fire and air. The yellow bile is
the humour of fire, being hot-dry; the black bile that of earth,
being cold-dry; the phlegm that of water, being cold-moist, and
the blood that of air, being hot-moist.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2467" id="noteref-2467" epub:type="noteref">2467</a> There were made in man
three hundred and sixty veins, two hundred and forty-nine bones,
and three souls<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2468" id="noteref-2468" epub:type="noteref">2468</a> or spirits, the animal, the rational and the natural,
to each of which is allotted its proper function. Moreover, Allah
made him a heart and spleen and lungs and six intestines and a
liver and two kidneys and buttocks and brain and bones and skin
and five senses; hearing, seeing, smell, taste, touch. The heart
He set on the left side of the breast and made the stomach the
guide and governor thereof. He appointed the lungs for a fan
to the heart and stablished the liver on the right side, opposite
thereto. Moreover, He made, besides this, the diaphragm and
the viscera and set up the bones of the breast and latticed them
with the ribs.” (¿) “How many ventricles are there in a man’s
head?”—Three, which contain five faculties, styled the intrinsic
senses, to wit, common sense, imagination, the thinking faculty,
perception and memory. (¿) “Describe to me the configuration
of the bones.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased to say her permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fiftieth Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
physicist said to her, “Describe to me the configuration of the
bones,” she replied, “Man’s frame consists of two hundred and forty
bones, which are divided into three parts, the head, the trunk and
the extremities. The head is divided into calvarium and face. The
skull is constructed of eight bones, and to it are attached the four
osselets of the ear. The face is furnished with an upper jaw of
eleven bones and a lower jaw of one; and to these are added the
teeth two-and-thirty in number, and the os hyoides.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2469" id="noteref-2469" epub:type="noteref">2469</a> The trunk is
divided into spinal column, breast and basin. The spinal column is
made up of four-and-twenty bones, called Fikár or vertebræ; the
breast, of the breast-bone and the ribs, which are four-and-twenty in
number, twelve on each side; and the basin of the hips, the sacrum<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2470" id="noteref-2470" epub:type="noteref">2470</a>
and the os coccygis. The extremities are divided into upper and
lower, arms and legs. The arms are again divided firstly into
shoulder, comprising shoulder blades and collar bone; secondly
into the upper arm which is one bone; thirdly into fore-arm, composed
of two bones, the radius and the ulna, and fourthly into the
hand, consisting of the wrist, the metacarpus of five and the fingers,
which number five, of three bones each, called the phalanges,
except the thumb, which hath but two. The lower extremities
are divided, firstly into thigh, which is one bone secondly into
leg, composed of three bones, the tibia, the fibula and the patella,
and thirdly into the foot, divided, like the hand, into tarsus,
metatarsus and toes; and is composed of seven bones, ranged
in two rows, two in one and five in the other; and the metatarsus
is composed of five bones and the toes number five, each
of three phalanges except the big toe which hath only two.”
(¿) “Which is the root of the veins?”—The aorta, from which
they ramify, and they are many, none knoweth the tale of them
save He who created them; but I repeat, it is said that they
number three hundred and sixty.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2471" id="noteref-2471" epub:type="noteref">2471</a> Moreover, Allah hath appointed
the tongue as interpreter for the thought, the eyes to serve as
lanterns, the nostrils to smell with, and the hands for prehensors.
The liver is the seat of pity, the spleen of laughter<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2472" id="noteref-2472" epub:type="noteref">2472</a> and the
kidneys of craft; the lungs are ventilators, the stomach the store-house
and the heart the prop and pillar of the body. When the
heart is sound, the whole body is sound, and when the heart is
corrupt, the whole body is corrupt. (¿) “What are the outward
signs and symptoms evidencing disease in the members of the
body, both external and internal?”—A physician, who is a man of
understanding, looketh into the state of the body and is guided by
the feel of the hands,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2473" id="noteref-2473" epub:type="noteref">2473</a> according as they are firm or flabby, hot or
cool, moist or dry. Internal disorders are also indicated by external
symptoms, such as yellowness of the white of the eyes, which
denoteth jaundice, and bending of the back, which denoteth disease
of the lungs.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and
ceased saying her permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-first Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel had described to the doctor the outer signs and symptoms
quoth he, “Thou hast replied aright! now what are the internal
symptoms of disease?”—The science of the diagnosis of disease by
internal symptoms is founded upon six canons, (1) the patient’s
actions; (2) what is evacuated from his body; (3) the nature of
the pain and (4) the site thereof; (5) swelling and (6) the effluvia
given off his person. (¿) “How cometh hurt to the head?”—By
the ingestion of food upon food, before the first be digested, and
by fullness upon fullness; this it is that wasteth peoples. He who
would live long, let him be early with the morning-meal and not
late with the evening-meal; let him be sparing of commerce with
women and chary of such depletory measures as cupping and
blood-letting; and let him make of his belly three parts, one for
food, one for drink and the third for air; for that a man’s intestines
are eighteen spans in length and it befitteth that he appoint six
for meat, six for drink, and six for breath. If he walk, let him go
gently; it will be wholesomer for him and better for his body and
more in accordance with the saying of the Almighty, “Walk not
proudly on the earth.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2474" id="noteref-2474" epub:type="noteref">2474</a> (¿) “What are the symptoms of yellow
bile and what is to be feared therefrom?”—The symptoms are
sallow complexion and bitter taste in the mouth with dryness;
failure of the appetite, venereal and other, and rapid pulse; and the
patient hath to fear high fever and delirium and eruptions and
jaundice and tumour and ulcers of the bowels and excessive thirst.
(¿) “What are the symptoms of black bile and what hath the
patient to fear from it, an it get the mastery of the body?”—The
symptoms are false appetite and great mental disquiet and cark
and care; and it behoveth that it be evacuated, else it will generate
melancholia<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2475" id="noteref-2475" epub:type="noteref">2475</a> and leprosy and cancer and disease of the spleen and
ulceration of the bowels. (¿) “Into how many branches is the art
of medicine divided?”—Into two: the art of diagnosing diseases
and that of restoring the diseased body to health. (¿) “When
is the drinking of medicine more efficacious than other-when?”—When
the sap runs in the wood and the grape thickens in the
cluster and the two auspicious planets, Jupiter and Venus, are in
the ascendant; then setteth in the proper season for drinking of
drugs and doing away of disease. (¿) “What time is it, when, if a
man drink water from a new vessel, the drink is sweeter and lighter
or more digestible to him than at another time, and there ascendeth
to him a pleasant fragrance and a penetrating?”——When he
waiteth awhile after eating, as quoth the poet:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Drink not upon thy food in haste but wait awhile; ✿ Else thou with halter shalt thy frame to sickness lead:</div>
      <div class="line">And patient bear a little thirst from food, then drink; ✿ And thus, O brother, haply thou shalt win thy need.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2476" id="noteref-2476" epub:type="noteref">2476</a></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>(¿) “What food is it that giveth not rise to ailments?”—That which
is not eaten but after hunger, and when it is eaten, the ribs are not
filled with it, even as saith Jálínús or Galen the physician, “Whoso
will take in food, let him go slowly and he shall not go wrongly.”
And to conclude with His saying (on whom be blessing and
peace!), “The stomach is the house of disease, and diet is the
head of healing; for the origin of all sickness is indigestion, that
is to say, corruption of the meat”——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-second Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
the damsel said to the doctor, “The stomach is the house of
disease and diet is the head of healing; for the origin of all sickness
is indigestion, that is to say, corruption of the meat in the
stomach;” he rejoined, “Thou hast replied aright! what sayest
thou of the Hammam?”—Let not the full man enter it. Quoth
the Prophet, “The bath is the blessing of the house, for that it
cleanseth the body and calleth to mind the Fire.” (¿) “What
Hammams are best for bathing in?”—Those whose waters are
sweet and whose space is ample and which are kept well aired;
their atmosphere representing the four seasons—autumn and summer
and winter and spring. (¿) “What kind of food is the most
profitable?”—That which women make and which hath not cost
overmuch trouble and which is readily digested. The most
excellent of food is brewis<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2477" id="noteref-2477" epub:type="noteref">2477</a> or bread sopped in broth; according
to the saying of the Prophet, “Brewis excelleth other food, even
as Ayishah excelleth other women.” (¿) “What kind of kitchen,
or seasoning, is most profitable?”—“Flesh meat” (quoth the
Prophet) “is the most excellent of kitchen; for that it is the
delight of this world and the next world.” (¿) “What kind of
meat is the most profitable?”—Mutton; but jerked meat is to be
avoided, for there is no profit in it. (¿) “What of fruits?”—Eat
them in their prime and quit them when their season is past.
(¿) “What sayest thou of drinking water?”—Drink it not in large
quantities nor swallow it by gulps, or it will give thee head-ache
and cause divers kinds of harm; neither drink it immediately after
leaving the Hammam nor after carnal copulation or eating (except
it be after the lapse of fifteen minutes for a young man and forty
for an old man), nor after waking from sleep. (¿) “What of drinking
fermented liquors?”—Doth not the prohibition suffice thee in
the Book of Almighty Allah, where He saith, “Verily, wine and
lots and images, and the divining arrows are an abomination, of
Satan’s work; therefore avoid them, that ye may prosper”?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2478" id="noteref-2478" epub:type="noteref">2478</a> And
again, “They will ask thee concerning wine and lots: Answer, ‘In
both there is great sin and also some things of use unto men:
but their sinfulness is greater than their use.’”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2479" id="noteref-2479" epub:type="noteref">2479</a> Hence quoth the
poet:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">O bibber of liquor, art not ashamed ✿ To drink what Allah forbade thee drain?</div>
      <div class="line">Put it far from thee and approach it not; ✿ It holds what Allah forbade as bane.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>And quoth another to the same purport:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I drank the sin till my reason fled: ✿ I’ll drink that reason to loss misled!</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>As for the advantages that be therein, it disperseth stone and
gravel from the kidneys and strengtheneth the viscera and
banisheth care, and moveth to generosity and preserveth health
and digestion; it conserveth the body, expelleth disease from the
joints, purifieth the frame of corrupt humours, engendereth cheerfulness,
gladdeneth the heart of man and keepeth up the natural
heat: it contracteth the bladder, enforceth the liver and removeth
obstructions, reddeneth the cheeks, cleareth away maggots from
the brain and deferreth grey hairs. In short, had not Allah (to
whom be honour and glory!) forbidden it,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2480" id="noteref-2480" epub:type="noteref">2480</a> there were not on the
face of the earth aught fit to stand in its stead. As for gambling
by lots, it is a game of hazard such as dicing not of skill.
(¿) “What wine is best?”—That which is pressed from white
grapes and kept eighty days or more after fermentation: it
resembleth not water and indeed there is nothing on the surface
of the earth like unto it. (¿) “What sayest thou of cupping?”—It
is for him who is over full of blood and who hath no defect
therein; and whoso would be cupped, let it be during the wane of
the moon, on a day without cloud, wind or rain and on the
seventeenth of the month. If it fall on a Tuesday, it will be the
more efficacious, and nothing is more salutary for the brain and
eyes and for clearing the intellect than cupping.——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted
say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-third Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel enumerated the benefits of cupping, quoth the doctor,
“What is the best time for cupping?”—One should be cupped ‘on
the spittle,’ that is, in the morning before eating, for this fortifieth
the wit and the memory. It is reported of the Prophet that, when
anyone complained to him of a pain in the head or legs, he would
bid him be cupped and after cupping not eat salt food fasting,
for it engendereth scurvy; neither eat sour things as curded milk<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2481" id="noteref-2481" epub:type="noteref">2481</a>
immediately after cupping. (¿) “When is cupping to be avoided?”—On
Sabbaths or Saturdays and Wednesdays, and let him who is
cupped on these days blame none but himself. Moreover, one
should not be cupped in very hot weather nor in very cold
weather; and the best season for cupping is springtide. Quoth
the doctor, “Now tell me of carnal copulation.” Hereupon
Tawaddud hung her head, for shame and confusion before the
Caliph’s majesty; then said, “By Allah, O Commander of the
Faithful, it is not that I am at fault, but that I am ashamed;
though, indeed, the answer is on the edge of my tongue.” Said
the Caliph; “Speak, O damsel,” whereupon said she, “Copulation
hath in it many and exceeding virtues and praiseworthy qualities,
amongst which are, that it lighteneth a body full of black bile and
calmeth the heat of love and induceth affection and dilateth the
heart and dispelleth the sadness of solitude; and the excess of
it is more harmful in summer and autumn than in spring and
winter.” (¿) “What are its good effects?”—It banisheth trouble
and disquiet, calmeth love and wrath and is good for ulcers,
especially in a cold and dry humour; on the other hand excess
of it weakeneth the sight and engendereth pains in the legs and
head and back: and beware, beware of carnal connection with old
women, for they are deadly. Quoth the Imam Ali<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2482" id="noteref-2482" epub:type="noteref">2482</a> (whose face
Allah honour!), “Four things kill and ruin the body: entering the
Hammam on a full stomach; eating salt food; copulation on a
plethora of blood and lying with an ailing woman; for she will
weaken thy strength and infect thy frame with sickness; and an
old woman is deadly poison.” And quoth one of them, “Beware
of taking an old woman to wife, though she be richer in hoards
than Kárún.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2483" id="noteref-2483" epub:type="noteref">2483</a> (¿) “What is the best copulation?”—If the woman
be tender of years, comely of shape, fair of face, swelling of breast
and of noble race, she will add to thee strength and health of body;
and let her be even as saith a certain poet describing her:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Seeing thy looks wots she what thou desir’st, ✿ By inspiration; wants nor word nor sign;</div>
      <div class="line">And, when thou dost behold her rarest grace, ✿ The charms of every garden canst decline.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>(¿) “At what time is copulation good?”—If by night, after food
digested and if by day, after the morning meal. (¿) “What are
the most excellent fruits?”—Pomegranate and citron. (¿) “Which
is the most excellent of vegetables?”—Endive.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2484" id="noteref-2484" epub:type="noteref">2484</a> (¿) “Which of
sweet-scented flowers?”—Rose and Violet. (¿) “How is the
seed of man secreted?”—There is in man a vein which feedeth
all the other veins. Now water is collected from the three hundred
and sixty veins and, in the form of red blood, entereth the left
testicle, where it is decocted, by the heat of temperament inherent
in the son of Adam, into a thick, white liquid, whose odour is as
that of the palm-spathe. (¿) “What flying thing is it that emitteth
seed and menstruateth?”—The flitter-mouse,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2485" id="noteref-2485" epub:type="noteref">2485</a> that is the bat.
(¿) “What is that which, when confined and shut out from the
air liveth, and when let out to smell the air dieth?”—The fish.
(¿) “What serpent layeth eggs?”—The Su’ban or dragon.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2486" id="noteref-2486" epub:type="noteref">2486</a> With
this the physician waxed weary with much questioning, and held
his peace, when Tawaddud said to the Caliph, “O Commander of
the Faithful, he hath questioned me till he is tired out and now
I will ask him one question, which if he answer not, I will take his
clothes as lawful prize.”——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of
day and ceased to say her permitted say.</p>

<div></div>
<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-fourth Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when
the damsel said to the Commander of the Faithful, “Verily he hath
questioned me till he is tired out, and now I will ask him one
question, which if he answer not I will take his clothes as lawful
prize,” the Caliph cried, “Ask on.” So quoth she to the physician,
“What is that thing which resembleth the earth in roundness, whose
resting-place and whose spine are hidden from men’s eyes; little
of price and estimation; narrow of chest and shackled as to throat
though it be nor runaway slave nor pestilent thief; thrust through
and through, though not in fray, and wounded, though not in fight;
time eateth its vigour and water wasteth it away; now it is beaten
without blemish, and then made to serve without stint; united
after separation; submissive, but not to him who caresseth it;
pregnant without child in belly; drooping, yet not leaning on its
side; becoming dirty yet purifying itself; cleaving to its fere,
yet changing; copulating without a yard, wrestling without arms:
resting and taking its ease; bitten, yet not crying out: now more
complaisant than a cup-companion and then more troublesome
than summer-heat; leaving its mate by night and embracing her
by day and having its abode in the corners of the mansions of the
noble?” The physician was silent awhile in perplexity and his
colour changed and he bowed his head and made no reply; whereupon
she said to him, “Ho, sir doctor, speak or doff thy dress.”
At this, he rose and said, “O Commander of the Faithful, bear
witness against me that this damsel is more learned than I in
medicine and what else, and that I cannot cope with her.” And
he put off his clothes and fled forth. Quoth the Caliph to Tawaddud,
“Ree us thy riddle,” and she replied, “O Commander of
the Faithful, it is the button and the button-loop.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2487" id="noteref-2487" epub:type="noteref">2487</a>”—Then she
undertook the astronomers and said, “Let him of you who is an
astronomer rise and come forward.” So the astronomer advanced
and sat down before her; and, when she saw him, she laughed and
said, “Art thou the astronomer, the mathematician, the scribe?”
“Yes,” answered he. Quoth she, “Ask of what thou wilt; success
resteth with Allah.” So he said, “Tell me of the sun and its rising
and setting?” And she replied:—Know that the sun riseth
from the shadows in the Eastern hemisphere and setteth in the
shadows of the Western, and each hemisphere compriseth one
hundred and eighty degrees. Quoth Allah Almighty, ‘I swear by
the Lord of the East and of the West.’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2488" id="noteref-2488" epub:type="noteref">2488</a> And again, ‘He it is
who hath ordained the sun to shine by day, and the moon for a
light by night; and hath appointed her station that ye might
know the number of years and the computation of time.’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2489" id="noteref-2489" epub:type="noteref">2489</a> The
moon is Sultan of the night and the sun Sultan of the day, and
they vie with each other in their courses and follow without overtaking
each other. Quoth Almighty Allah, ‘It is not expedient
that the sun overtake the moon in her course; neither doth the
night outstrip the day, but each of these luminaries moveth in
a peculiar orbit.’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2490" id="noteref-2490" epub:type="noteref">2490</a> (¿) “When the day cometh, what becometh of
the night; and what of the day, when the night cometh?”—He
causeth the night to enter in upon the day, and He causeth the
day to enter in upon the night.’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2491" id="noteref-2491" epub:type="noteref">2491</a> (¿) “Enumerate to me the mansions
of the moon?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2492" id="noteref-2492" epub:type="noteref">2492</a>—They number eight-and-twenty, to wit,
Sharatán, Butayn, Surayá, Dabarán, Hak’ah, Han’ah, Zirá’a,
Nasrah, Tarf, Jabhah, Zubrah, Sarfah, ‘Awwá, Simák, Ghafar,
Zubání, Iklíl, Kalb, Shaulah, Na’am, Baldah, Sa’ad al-Zábih,
Sa’ad al-Bul’a, Sa’ad al-Su’úd, Sa’ad al-Akhbiyah, Fargh the
Former and Fargh the Latter; and Risháa. They are disposed
in the order of the letters of the Abjad-hawwaz or older alphabet,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2493" id="noteref-2493" epub:type="noteref">2493</a>
according to their numerical power, and in them are secret
virtues which none knoweth save Allah (extolled and exalted
be He!) and the stablished in science. They are divided among
the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, two mansions and a third of a
mansion to each Sign. Thus Sharatan, Butayn and one-third
of Suráyá, belong to Aries, the other two-thirds of Suráyá,
Dabaran and two-thirds of Hak’ah to Taurus, the other third of
Hak’ah, Han’ah and Zira’a to Gemini; Nasrah, Tarf and a third
of Jabhah to Cancer, the other two-thirds of Jabhah, Zubrah and
two-thirds of Sarfah to Leo; the other third of Sarfah, ‘Awwá
and Simák to Virgo; Ghafar, Zubáni and one-third of Iklíl to
Libra; the other two-thirds of Iklil, Kalb and two-thirds of
Shaulah to Scorpio; the other third of Shaulah, Na’áim and
Baldah to Sagittarius; Sa’ad al-Zábih, Sa’ad al-Bul’a and one-third
of Sa’ad al-Su’ud to Capricorn, the other two-thirds of
Sa’ad al-Su’úd, Sa’ad al-Akhbiyah and two-thirds of Fargh the
Former to Aquarius, the other third of Fargh the Former, Fargh
the Latter and Risháa to Pisces.——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-fifth Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel enumerated the Mansions and distributed them into their
Signs, the astronomer said, “Thou hast replied aright; now tell
me of the planets and their natures, also of their sojourn in the
Zodiacal Signs, their aspects, auspicious and sinister, their houses,
ascendants and descendants.” She answered, “The sitting is
narrow for so large a matter, but I will say as much as I can.
Now the planets number seven; which are, the Sun, the Moon,
Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn. The Sun, hot-dry, sinister
in conjunction, favourable in opposition, abideth thirty days in
each Sign. The Moon, cold-moist and favourable of aspect,
tarrieth in each Sign two days and a third of another day.
Mercury is of a mixed nature, favourable in conjunction with
the favourable, and sinister in conjunction with the sinister
aspects, and abideth in each sign seventeen days and a half
day. Venus, temperate and favourable, abideth in each sign
five-and-twenty days. Mars is sinister and woneth in each sign
ten months. Jupiter is auspicious and abideth in each sign a
year. Saturn, cold-dry and sinister, tarrieth in each sign thirty
months. The house of the Sun is Leo, her ascendant is Aries,
and her descendant Aquarius. The Moon’s house is Cancer,
his ascendant Taurus, his descendant Scorpio and his sinister
aspect Capricorn. Saturn’s house is Capricorn-Aquarius, his
ascendant Libra, his descendant Aries and his sinister aspects
Cancer and Leo. Jupiter’s house is Pisces-Sagittarius, his ascendant
Cancer, his descendant Capricorn and his sinister aspects
Gemini and Leo. Venus’s house is Taurus, her ascendant Pisces,
her descendant Libra, and her sinister aspects Aries and Scorpio.
Mercury’s house is Gemini-Virgo, his ascendant Virgo, his
descendant Pisces, and his sinister aspect Taurus. Mars’s house
is Aries-Scorpio, his ascendant Capricorn, his descendant
Cancer and his sinister aspect Libra.” Now when the astronomer
saw her acuteness and comprehensive learning and heard
her fair answers, he bethought him for a sleight to confound her
before the Commander of the Faithful, and said to her, “O
damsel, tell me, will rain fall this month?” At this she bowed her
head and pondered so long, that the Caliph thought her at a loss
for an answer and the astronomer said to her, “Why dost thou
not speak?” Quoth she, “I will not speak except the Commander
of the Faithful give me leave.” So the Caliph laughed and said,
“How so?” Cried she, “I would have thee give me a sword, that
I may strike off his head, for he is an Infidel, an Agnostic, an
Atheist.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2494" id="noteref-2494" epub:type="noteref">2494</a>” At this, loud laughed the Caliph and those about him
laughed, and she continued, “O astronomer, there are five things
that none knoweth save Allah Almighty;” and she repeated the
verset; ‘Aye! Allah!—with Him is the knowledge of the hour
and He causeth the rain to descend at His own appointed time—and
He knoweth what is in the wombs of females—but no
soul knoweth what it shall have gotten on the morrow; neither
wotteth any soul in what land it shall die: Verily Allah is knowing,
informed of all.’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2495" id="noteref-2495" epub:type="noteref">2495</a> Quoth the astronomer, “Thou hast said well,
and I, by Allah, thought only to try thee.” Rejoined she, “Know
that the almanack-makers have certain signs and tokens, referring
to the planets and constellations relative to the coming in of the
year; and folk have learned something by experience.” (¿) “What
be that?”—Each day hath a planet that ruleth it: so if the first
day in the year fall on First Day (Sunday) that day is the Sun’s
and this portendeth (though Allah alone is All-knowing!) oppression
of kings and sultans and governors and much miasma and
lack of rain; and that people will be in great tumult and the grain-crop
will be good, except lentils, which will perish, and the vines
will rot and flax will be dear and wheat cheap from the beginning
of Túbah to the end of Barmahát.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2496" id="noteref-2496" epub:type="noteref">2496</a> And, in this year there will
be much fighting among kings, and there shall be great plenty of
good in this year, but Allah is All-knowing! (¿) “What if the first
day fall on Second Day (Monday)?”—That day belongeth to the
Moon and portendeth righteousness in administrators and officials;
and that it will be a year of much rain and grain-crops will be
good, but linseed will decay and wheat will be cheap in the month
Kiyáhk;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2497" id="noteref-2497" epub:type="noteref">2497</a> also the plague will rage and the sheep and goats
will die, grapes will be plentiful and honey scarce and cotton
cheap; and Allah is omniscient!——And Shahrazad perceived
the dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-sixth Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, it hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel ended her notice of Second Day the astronomer said to
her “Now tell me what will occur if New Year’s day fall on Third
Day (Tuesday).” She replied, That is Mars’ day and portendeth
death of great men and much destruction and deluge of blood
and dearness of grain; lack of rain and scarcity of fish, which will
anon be in excess and anon fail. Lentils and honey in this year
will be cheap and linseed dear and only barley will thrive, to the
exception of all other cereals: great will be the fighting among
kings and death will be in the blood and there will be much mortality
among asses. (¿) “What if it fall on Fourth Day?”—That
is Mercury’s day and portendeth great tumult among the folk and
much enmity and, though rains be moderate, rotting of some of
the green crops; also that there will be sore mortality among
cattle and young children and much fighting by sea; that wheat
will be dear from Barmúdah to Misra<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2498" id="noteref-2498" epub:type="noteref">2498</a> and other grains cheap;
thunder and lightning will abound and honey will be dear, palm-trees
will thrive and bear abundantly and flax and cotton will be
plentiful, while radishes and onions will be dear; but Allah is
All-knowing! (¿) “What if it fall on Fifth Day?”—That is
Jupiter’s day and portendeth equity in Wazirs and righteousness
in Kazis and Fakirs and the Ministers of religion; and that good
will be plentiful: rains and fruit and trees and grain will abound,
and flax, cotton, honey, grapes and fish be cheap; and Allah is
Omniscient! (¿) “What if it fall on Meeting Day or Friday?”—That
day appertaineth to Venus and portendeth oppression in the
chiefs of the Jinn and talk of forgery and back-biting; there will
be much dew; the autumn crops will be good in the land and there
will be cheapness in one town and not in another: ungraciousness
will be rife by land and sea; linseed will be dear, also wheat, in
Hátúr, but cheap in Amshír; honey will be dear and grapes and
water-melons will rot; and Allah is Omniscient! (¿) “What if it
fall on the Sabbath (Saturday)?”—“That is Saturn’s day and portendeth
the preferment of slaves and Greeks and those in whom
there is no good, neither in their neighbourhood; there will be
great drought and dearth; clouds will abound and death will be
rife among the sons of Adam and woe to the people of Egypt and
Syria from the oppression of the Sultan and failure of blessing
upon the green crops and rotting of grain; and Allah is All-knowing!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2499" id="noteref-2499" epub:type="noteref">2499</a>
Now with this, the astronomer hung his head very
low, and she said to him, “O astronomer, I will ask thee one
question, which if thou answer not, I will take thy clothes.” “Ask,”
replied he. Quoth she, “Where is Saturn’s dwelling-place?”; and
he answered, “In the seventh heaven.” (¿) “And that of Jupiter?”—In
the sixth heaven. (¿) “And that of Mars?”—In the
fifth heaven. (¿) “And that of the Sun?”—In the fourth heaven.
(¿) “And that of Venus?”—In the third heaven. (¿) “And that of
Mercury?”—In the second heaven. (¿) “And that of the Moon?”—In
the first heaven. Quoth she, “Well answered; but I have one
more question to ask thee;” and quoth he, “Ask!” Accordingly
she said, “Now tell me concerning the stars, into how many
parts are they divided.” But he was silent and answered nothing;
and she cried to him, “Put off thy clothes.” So he doffed them
and she took them; after which the Caliph said to her, “Tell us
the answer to thy question.” She replied:—O Commander of the
Faithful, the stars are divided into three parts, whereof one-third
is hung in the sky of the earth,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2500" id="noteref-2500" epub:type="noteref">2500</a> as it were lamps, to give light to
the earth, and a part is used to shoot the demons withal, when
they draw near by stealth to listen to the talk in heaven. Quoth
Allah Almighty, ‘Verily, we have dight the sky of the earth with
the adornment of the stars; and have appointed them for projectiles
against every rebellious Satan.’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2501" id="noteref-2501" epub:type="noteref">2501</a> And the third part is hung
in air to illuminate the seas and give light to what is therein.
Quoth the astronomer, “I have one more question to ask, which if
she answer, I will avow myself beaten.” “Say on,” answered she.——And
Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying
her permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-seventh Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She continued, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
astronomer said, “Now tell me what four contraries are based
upon other four contraries?” Replied she, “The four qualities
of Caloric and Frigoric, Humidity and Siccity; for of heat Allah
created fire, whose nature is hot-dry; of dryness, earth, which is
cold-dry; of cold, water, which is cold-wet; of moisture, air, which
is hot-wet. Moreover, He created twelve Signs of the Zodiac,
Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio,
Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces; and appointed them
of the four humours; three fiery, Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius; three
earthy, Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn; three airy, Gemini, Libra
and Aquarius; and three watery, Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces.”
Hereupon the astronomer rose, and saying, “Bear witness against
me that she is more learned than I,” away he went beaten. Then
quoth the Caliph, “Where is the philosopher<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2502" id="noteref-2502" epub:type="noteref">2502</a>?”; at which one
rose hastily and came forward and said to Tawaddud, “What is
Time and what be its limits, and its days, and what things bringeth
it?” Replied she, “Time is a term applied to the hours of the
night and day, which are but the measures of the courses of the
sun and moon in their several heavens, even as Allah Almighty
telleth us when he saith, ‘A sign to them also is the Night, from
which we strip off the day, and lo! they are plunged in darkness,
and the Sun runneth to her place of rest; this is the ordinance
of the Sublime, the All-knowing.’”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2503" id="noteref-2503" epub:type="noteref">2503</a> (¿) “How cometh unbelief to
the son of Adam?”—It is reported of the Apostle (whom Allah
bless and preserve!) that he said, ‘Unbelief in a man runneth as
the blood runneth in his veins, when he revileth the world and
Time and night and the Hour.’ And again, ‘Let none of you
revile Time, for Time is God;’ neither revile the world, for she
saith, May Allah not aid him who revileth me! neither revile the
hour, for, ‘The Hour is surely coming, there is no doubt thereof’;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2504" id="noteref-2504" epub:type="noteref">2504</a>
neither revile the earth, for it is a portent, according to the saying
of the Most High, ‘Out of the ground have we created you, and
into the same will we cause you to return, and we will bring you
forth yet thence another time.’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2505" id="noteref-2505" epub:type="noteref">2505</a> (¿) “What are the five that ate
and drank, yet came not out of loins nor womb?”—Adam and
Simeon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2506" id="noteref-2506" epub:type="noteref">2506</a> and Salih’s she-camel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2507" id="noteref-2507" epub:type="noteref">2507</a> and Ishmael’s ram and the bird
that Abu Bakr the Truth-teller saw in the cave.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2508" id="noteref-2508" epub:type="noteref">2508</a> (¿) “Tell me of
five that are in Paradise and are neither humans, Jinns nor
angels?”—Jacob’s wolf and the Seven Sleepers’ dog and Esdras’s
ass and Salih’s camel and Duldul the mule of the Prophet (upon
whom be blessings and peace!). (¿) “What man prayed a prayer
neither on earth nor in heaven?”—Solomon, when he prayed on
his carpet, borne by the wind. (¿) “Ree me this riddle:—A man
once looked at a handmaid during dawn-prayer, and she was unlawful
to him; but, at noonday she became lawful to him: by
mid-afternoon, she was again unlawful, but at sundown, she was
lawful to him: at supper time she was a third time unlawful, but
by daybreak, she became once more lawful to him.”—This was a
man who looked at another’s slave-girl in the morning, and she
was then unlawful to him; but at midday he bought her, and she
became lawful to him: at mid-afternoon he freed her, and she
became unlawful to him; but at sundown he married her and she
was again lawful to him. At nightfall he divorced her and
she was then a third time unlawful to him; but, next morning
at daybreak, he took her back, and she became once more lawful
to him. (¿) “Tell me what tomb went about with him that lay
buried therein?”—Jonah’s whale, when it had swallowed him.
(¿) “What spot of lowland is it, upon which the sun shone once,
but will never again shine till Judgment-Day?”—The bottom of
the Red Sea, when Moses smote it with his staff, and the sea
clave asunder in twelve places, according to the number of the
tribes;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2509" id="noteref-2509" epub:type="noteref">2509</a> then the sun shone on the bottom and will do so nevermore
until Judgment-Day.——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-eighth Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the
philosopher then addressed the damsel saying, “What was the
first skirt that trailed over the face of the earth?” She replied,
“That of Hagar, out of shame before Sarah; and it became a
custom among the Arabs.” (¿) “What is that which breatheth
without life?”—Quoth Almighty Allah, ‘By the morning when
it breatheth!’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2510" id="noteref-2510" epub:type="noteref">2510</a> (¿) “Ree me this riddle:—A number of pigeons
came to a high tree and lighted, some on the tree and others
under it. Said those on the tree to those on the ground:—If one
of you come up to us, ye will be a third part of us all in number;
and if one of us descend to you, we shall be like unto you in
number. How many pigeons were there in all?”—Twelve: seven
alighted on the tree and five beneath; and, if one go up, those
above would be eight to four; and, if one go down, both would be
six and Allah is all-knowing.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2511" id="noteref-2511" epub:type="noteref">2511</a> With this the philosopher put
off his clothes and fled: whereupon the next contest took place,
for she turned to the Olema present and said, “Which of you is
the rhetorician that can discourse of all arts and sciences?”
There came forward a sage hight Ibrahim bin Siyyár and said
to her, “Think me not like the rest.” Quoth she, “It is the more
assured to me that thou wilt be beaten, for that thou art a boaster;
and Allah will help me to victory over thee, that I may strip thee
of thy clothes. So, if thou sentest one to fetch thee wherewithal
to cover thyself, ‘twould be well for thee.” Cried he, “By
Allah, I will assuredly conquer thee and make thee a byword
among the peoples, generation after generation!” Rejoined she,
“Do penance in advance for thy broken oath.” Then he asked,
“What five things did Allah create before he made man?”; and
she answered, “Water and earth and light and darkness and the
fruits of the earth.” (¿) “What did Allah create with the hand
of omnipotence?”—The ‘Arsh, throne of God or the empyreal
heaven and the tree Túbá<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2512" id="noteref-2512" epub:type="noteref">2512</a> and Adam and the garden of Eden;
these Allah created with the hand of His omnipotence; but to all
other created things He said, “Be,”—and they were. (¿) “Who is
thy father in Al-Islam?”—Mohammed, whom Allah bless and
preserve! (¿) “Who was the father in Al-Islam of Mohammed?”—Abraham,
the Friend of God. (¿) “What is the Faith of Al-Islam?”—The
professing that there is no God but <em>the</em> God and
that Mohammed is the apostle of God. (¿) “What is thy first
and thy last?”—My first is man’s seed in the shape of foul
water and my last filthy carrion: the first of me is dust and the
last of me is dust. Quoth the poet:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Of dust was I created, and man did I become, ✿ In question ever ready and aye fluent in reply,</div>
      <div class="line">Then, I unto the dust return’d, became of it again, ✿ For that, in very deed, of dust at first create was I.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>He continued, “What thing was it, whose first state was wood and
its last life?”—Moses’ staff,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2513" id="noteref-2513" epub:type="noteref">2513</a> when he cast it on the valley-ground
and it became, by permission of Allah, a writhing serpent.
(¿) “What is the meaning of the word of the Lord, ‘And I have
other occasion for it?’”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2514" id="noteref-2514" epub:type="noteref">2514</a>—He, Moses, was wont to plant his staff
in the ground, and it would flower and fruit and shade him from
the heat and from the cold. Moreover, it would carry him when
he was weary, and whilst he slept guard his sheep from lions and
wild beasts. (¿) “What woman was born of a man alone and
what man of a woman alone?”—Eve of Adam and Jesus of
Mary.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2515" id="noteref-2515" epub:type="noteref">2515</a> (¿) “Tell me of the four fires, what fire eateth and
drinketh; what fire eateth but drinketh not; what fire drinketh
but eateth not and what other neither eateth nor drinketh?”—The
fire of the world eateth but drinketh not; the fire which
eateth and drinketh is Hell-fire; the fire of the sun drinketh but
eateth not, and the fire of the moon neither eateth nor drinketh.
(¿) “Which is the open door and which the shut?”—The Traditional
Ordinances are the open door, the Koranic the shut door.
(¿) “Of what doth the poet speak, when he saith:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">And dweller in the tomb whose food is at his head, ✿ When he eateth of that meat, of words he waxeth fain:</div>
      <div class="line">He riseth and he walketh and he talketh without tongue; ✿ And returneth to the tomb where his kith and kin are lain.</div>
      <div class="line">No living wight is he, yet in honour he abides; ✿ Nor dead yet he deserveth that Allah him assain.”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>She replied, “The reed-pen.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2516" id="noteref-2516" epub:type="noteref">2516</a> Quoth he, “What doth the poet
refer to in these verses:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Two vests in one; blood flowing easiest wise; ✿ Rosy red ears and mouth wide open lies;</div>
      <div class="line">It hath a cock-like form, its belly pecks ✿ And, if you price it, half a dirham buys.”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>She replied, “The ink-case.” Quoth he, “And in these:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Ho say to men of wisdom, wit and lore ✿ To sapient, reverend, clever counsellor:</div>
      <div class="line">Tell me what was’t you saw that bird bring forth ✿ When wandering Arab-land and Ajam o’er?</div>
      <div class="line">No flesh it beareth and it hath no blood, ✿ Nor down nor any feathers e’er it wore.</div>
      <div class="line">‘Tis eaten cooked and eke ‘tis eaten cold; ✿ ‘Tis eaten buried ‘neath the flames that roar:</div>
      <div class="line">It showeth two-fold colours, silver white ✿ And yellow brighter than pure golden ore:</div>
      <div class="line">‘Tis not seen living or we count it dead: ✿ So ree my riddle rich in marvel-store!”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>She replied, “Thou makest longsome the questioning anent an
egg worth a mite.” “And this?:”—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">I waved to and fro and he waved to and fro, ✿ With a motion so pleasant, now fast and now slow;</div>
      <div class="line">And at last he sunk down on my bosom of snow; ✿ “Your lover friend?”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>—“<em>No friend, my fan</em>;”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2517" id="noteref-2517" epub:type="noteref">2517</a> said she. (¿) “How many words did
Allah speak to Moses?”—It is related of the Apostle that he
said, “God spoke to Moses fifteen hundred and fifteen words.”
(¿) “Tell me of fourteen things that speak to the Lord of the
Worlds?”—The seven heavens and the seven earths, when they
say, ‘We come obedient to Thy command.’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2518" id="noteref-2518" epub:type="noteref">2518</a>——And Shahrazad
perceived the dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.</p>

<div></div>
<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Fifty-ninth Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel made the answer, the philosopher continued, “Tell me of
Adam and how he was first created?” and she said, “Allah
created Adam of clay: the clay He made of foam and the foam
of the sea, the sea of darkness, darkness of light, light of a fish,
the fish of a rock, the rock of a ruby, the ruby of water, and
the water He created by His Omnipotence according to His
saying (exalted be His name!), ‘His commandment when He
willeth aught, is but to say, BE,—and IT IS.’”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2519" id="noteref-2519" epub:type="noteref">2519</a> (¿) “What is
meant by the poet in these verses:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">And eater lacking mouth and even maw; ✿ Yet trees and beasts to it are daily bread:</div>
      <div class="line">Well fed it thrives and shows a lively life, ✿ But give it water and you do it dead?”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>“This,” quoth she, “is Fire.” “And in these;” he asked:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">“Two lovers barred from every joy and bliss, ✿ Who through the livelong night embracing lie:</div>
      <div class="line">They guard the folk from all calamities, ✿ But with the rising sun apart they fly?”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>She answered, “The leaves of a door.” Quoth he, “Tell me of
the gates of Gehenna?” Quoth she, “They are seven in number
and their names are comprised in these two couplets:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Jahannam, next Lazá, and third Hatím; ✿ Then count Sa’ír and Sakar eke, five-fold,</div>
      <div class="line">Sixth comes Jahím and Háwiyah the seventh; ✿ Here are seven Hells in four lines briefly told.”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>Quoth he “To what doth the poet refer when he saith:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">She wears a pair of ringlets long let down ✿ Behind her, as she comes and goes at speed,</div>
      <div class="line">And eye that never tastes of sleep nor sheds ✿ A tear, for ne’er a drop it hath at need;</div>
      <div class="line">That never all its life wore stitch of clothes; ✿ Yet robes mankind in every mode of weed?”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>Quoth she, “A needle.” (¿) “What is the length and what the
breadth of the bridge Al-Sirát?”—Its length is three thousand
years’ journey, a thousand in descent and a thousand in ascent
and a thousand level: it is sharper than a sword and finer than a
hair.——And Shahrazad perceived the dawn of day and ceased
to say her permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Sixtieth Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel had described to him Al-Sirat, the philosopher said,
“Inform me how many intercessions with Allah hath the Prophet
for each soul?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2520" id="noteref-2520" epub:type="noteref">2520</a>—Three. (¿) “Was Abu Bakr the first
who embraced Al-Islam?”—Yes. (¿) “Yet Ali became a Moslem
before him?”—Ali came to the Prophet, when he was a boy of
seven years old, for Allah vouchsafed him knowledge of the way
of salvation in his tender youth, so that he never prostrated himself
to idols. Quoth he, “Tell me which is the more excellent,
Ali or Abbás?” Now she knew that, in propounding this question,
Ibrahim was laying a trap for her; for if she said, “Ali is more
excellent than Abbas,” she would lack excuse with the Caliph for
undervaluing his ancestor; so she bowed her head awhile, now
reddening, then paling, and lastly said, “Thou askest me of two
excellent men, each having his own excellence. Let us return to
what we were about.” When the Caliph Harun al-Rashid heard
her, he stood up and said, “Thou hast spoken well, by the Lord of
the Ka’abah, O Tawaddud!” Then quoth Ibrahim the rhetorician,
“What meaneth the poet when he saith:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Slim-wasted one, whose taste is sweetest-sweet, ✿ Likest a lance whereon no head we scan:</div>
      <div class="line">And all the lieges find it work them weal, ✿ Eaten of afternoon in Ramazan.”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>She answered, “The sugar-cane;” and he said, “Tell me of many
things.” Asked she, “What are they?” and he said, “What is
sweeter than honey; what is sharper than the sword; what is
swifter than poison; what is the delight of a moment and what
the contentment of three days; what is the pleasantest of days;
what is the joy of a week; what is that debt the worst debtor
denieth not; what is the prison of the tomb; what is the joy of
the heart; what is the snare of the soul; what is death-in-life;
what is the disease that may not be healed; what is the shame
that may not be wiped off; what is the beast that woneth not in
cultivated fields, but lodgeth in waste places and hateth the sons
of Adam and hath in him somewhat of the make of seven strong
and violent beasts?” Quoth she, “Hear what I shall say in
reply; then put off thy clothes, that I may explain to thee;”
and the Caliph said, “Expound, and he shall doff his clothes.” So
she said, “Now that, which is sweeter than honey, is the love of
pious children to their two parents; that, which is sharper than
the sword, is the tongue; that, which is swifter than poison, is the
Envier’s eye; the delight of a moment is carnal copulation and
the contentment of three days is the depilatory for women; the
pleasantest of days is that of profit on merchandise; the joy of a
week is the bride; the debt, which the worst debtor denieth not, is
death; the prison of the tomb is a bad son; the joy of the heart
is a woman obedient to her husband (and it is said also that, when
fleshmeat descendeth upon the heart, it rejoiceth therein); the
snare of the soul is a disobedient slave; death-in-life is poverty;
the disease that may not be healed is an ill-nature, and the shame
that may not be wiped away is an ill daughter; lastly, the beast
that woneth not in cultivated fields, but lodgeth in waste places
and hateth the sons of Adam and hath in him somewhat of the
make of seven strong and violent beasts, is the locust, whose head
is as the head of a horse, its neck as the neck of the bull, its wings
as the wings of the vulture, its feet as the feet of the camel, its tail
as the tail of the serpent, its belly as the belly of the scorpion and
its horns as the horns of the gazelle.” The Caliph was astounded
at her quickness and understanding, and said to the rhetorician,
“Doff thy clothes.” So he rose up and cried, “I call all who are
present in this assembly to witness that she is more learned than
I and every other learned man.” And he put off his clothes and
gave them to her, saying, “Take them and may Allah not bless
them to thee!” So the Caliph ordered him fresh clothes and said,
“O Tawaddud, there is one thing left of that for which thou didst
engage, namely, chess.” And he sent for experts of chess and
cards<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2521" id="noteref-2521" epub:type="noteref">2521</a> and trictrac. The chess-player sat down before her, and
they set the pieces, and he moved and she moved; but, every move
he made she speedily countered,——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased saying her permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-first Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that when the
damsel was playing chess with the expert in presence of the Commander
of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, whatever move he made
was speedily countered by her, till she beat him and he found himself
checkmated. Quoth he, “I did but lead thee on, that thou
mightest think thyself skilful: but set up again, and thou shalt
see.” So they placed the pieces a second time, when he said in
himself, “Open thine eyes or she will beat thee.” And he fell to
moving no piece, save after calculation, and ceased not to play, till
she said, “Thy King is dead!—Checkmate.” When he saw this
he was confounded at her quickness and understanding; but she
laughed and said, “O professor, I will make a wager with thee on
this third game. I will give thee the queen and the right-hand
castle and the left-hand knight; if thou beat me, take my clothes,
and if I beat thee, I will take thy clothes.” Replied he, “I agree
to this;” and they replaced the pieces, she removing queen, castle
and knight.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2522" id="noteref-2522" epub:type="noteref">2522</a> Then said she, “Move, O master.” So he moved,
saying to himself, “I cannot but beat her, with such odds,” and
planned a combination; but, behold, she moved on, little by little,
till she made one of her pawns<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2523" id="noteref-2523" epub:type="noteref">2523</a> a queen and pushing up to him
pawns and other pieces, to take off his attention, set one in his way
and tempted him to take it. Accordingly, he took it and she
said to him, “The measure is meted and the loads equally
balanced.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2524" id="noteref-2524" epub:type="noteref">2524</a> Eat till thou art over-full; naught shall be thy ruin,
O son of Adam, save thy greed. Knowest thou not that I did but
tempt thee, that I might finesse thee? See: this is check-mate!”
adding, “So doff off thy clothes.” Quoth he, “Leave me my bag-trousers,
so Allah repay thee;” and he swore by Allah that he
would contend with none, so long as Tawaddud abode in the realm
of Baghdad. Then he stripped off his clothes and gave them to
her and went away. Thereupon came the backgammon-player,
and she said to him, “If I beat thee, this day, what wilt thou give
me?” Quoth he, “I will give thee ten suits of brocade of Constantinople,
figured with gold, and ten suits of velvet and a
thousand gold pieces; and if I beat thee, I ask nothing but that
thou write me an acknowledgment of my victory.” Quoth she,
“To it, then, and do thy best.” So they played, and he lost and
went away, chattering in Frankish jargon and saying, “By the
bounty of the Commander of the Faithful, there is not her like
in all the regions of the world!” Then the Caliph summoned
players on instruments of music and asked her, “Dost thou know
aught of music?”; when she answered, “Even so!” He bade
bring a worn lute, polished by use, whose owner forlorn and lone
was by parting trodden down; and of which quoth one, describing
it:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Allah watered a land, and upsprang a tree ✿ Struck root deep down, and raised head a-sky:</div>
      <div class="line">The birds o’ersang it when green its wood; ✿ And the Fair o’ersing now the wood is dry.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>So they brought the lute in a bag of red satin, with tassels of
saffron-coloured silk: and she opened the bag, and took it out and
behold on it was graven:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Oft hath a tender bough made lute for maid, ✿ Whose swift sweet lays at feast men’s hearts invade:</div>
      <div class="line">She sings; it follows on her song, as though ✿ The Bulbuls<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2525" id="noteref-2525" epub:type="noteref">2525</a> taught her all the modes she played.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>She laid her lute in her lap and with bosom inclining over it, bent
to it with the bending of a mother who suckleth her child; then
she preluded in twelve different modes, till the whole assembly
was agitated with delight, like a waving sea, and she sang the
following:—</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c003">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">Cut short this strangeness, leave unruth of you; ✿ My heart shall love you aye, by youth of you!</div>
      <div class="line">Have ruth on one who sighs and weeps and moans, ✿ Pining and yearning for the troth of you.</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p>The Caliph was ravished and exclaimed, “Allah bless thee and
be merciful to him who taught thee!”: whereupon she rose and
kissed the ground before him. Then he sent for money and
paid her master Abu al-Husn an hundred thousand gold pieces
to her price; after which he said to her, “O Tawaddud, ask a
boon of me!” Replied she, “I ask of thee that thou restore
me to my lord who sold me.” “‘Tis well,” answered the Caliph
and restored her to her master and gave her five thousand dinars
for herself. Moreover, he appointed Abu al-Husn one of his cup-companions
for a permanence,——And Shahrazad perceived the
dawn of day and ceased to say her permitted say.</p>

<div class="ph3">

<div class="nf-center-c1">
<div class="nf-center c005">
    <div>Now when it was the Four Hundred and Sixty-second Night,</div>
  </div>
</div>

</div>

<p>She said, It hath reached me, O auspicious King, that the Caliph
gave the damsel five thousand dinars for herself and restored
her to her master whom he appointed one of his cup-companions
for a permanence and assigned him a monthly stipend of a
thousand dinars so long as he should live; and he abode with
the damsel Tawaddud in all solace and delight of life. Marvel
then, O King, at the eloquence of this damsel and the hugeness of
her learning and understanding and her perfect excellence in all
branches of art and science; and consider the generosity of the
Commander of the Faithful, Harun al-Rashid, in that he gave her
master this money and said to her, “Ask a boon of me;” and she
besought him to restore her to her lord. So he restored her to
him and gave her five thousand dinars for herself and made him
one of his boon-companions. Where is such generosity to be
found after the Abbaside Caliphs?—May Allah Almighty have
mercy upon them, one and all! And they tell a tale of</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
