<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="volume-16" id="chapter-16-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Appendix IV.<br/>
			<em>ADDITIONAL NOTES ON THE BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE THOUSAND AND ONE NIGHTS.</em></h2>
			<div class="nf-center-c1">
				<div class="c005 nf-center">
					<div>(Cf. Nights, x., App. ii., pp. 465–532).</div>
					<div class="c003"><span class="sc">By</span> W. F. KIRBY.</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>Herewith I add notes on any works of importance which I had not seen when my “Contributions” were published, or which have appeared since. Owing to the occasional missing of a proof, some misprints escaped correction in my former article, and these I will place first, along with the correction of other slight errors. Tales and more important notes will follow under the same headings as before.</p>
			<h4 class="c030">
				<span class="sc">Errata, &amp;c., in Vol. X.</span>
			</h4>
			<p class="c027">P. 470, l. 21, <em>for</em> “even has” <em>read</em> “has even,” l. 3 from bottom, <em>for</em> “Chelih” <em>read</em> “Chebib.”</p>
			<p>P. 474, ll. 6 and 5 from bottom, <em>for</em> “taken from Dow’s Persian Tales of Inatulla,” <em>read</em> “taken from the latter part of that of Prince Fadlallah (1001 Days, cf. our p. 500, No. 4a; or from No. 251j of our Table).”</p>
			<p>P. 491, l. 14 from bottom, <em>after</em> “frontispieces” <em>add</em> “and an Appendix including a table of the tales contained in the MS.”</p>
			<p>P. 492, l. 35, <em>for</em> “3c” <em>read</em> “3e.”</p>
			<p>P. 495, l. 14 from bottom, <em>for</em> “Burton iii.” <em>read</em> “Burton ii.”</p>
			<p>P. 497, l. 5, <em>for</em> “Xailonn” <em>read</em> “Xailoun,” l. 22, <em>for</em> “Mr. W. R. Clouston” <em>read</em> “Mr. W. A. Clouston,” l. 11 from bottom, <em>for</em> “Kasiwirski” <em>read</em> “Kasimirski.”</p>
			<p>P. 500, l. 6 <em>for</em> “Dilora” <em>read</em> “Dilara,” l. 8 (No 4a), <em>add</em> “ = Nos. 184 and 251,” l. 16 (No. 5e.) <em>add</em> “cf. Nos. 135q and 225,” l. 22 (No. 8), <em>add</em> “ = No. 181r.”</p>
			<p>P. 501, l. 1, <em>after</em> “ants” <em>add</em> “Weber (ii. p. 426) has substituted wild beasts!”</p>
			<p>P. 506, l. 16, <em>for</em> “160” <em>read</em> “140.”</p>
			<p>P. 508. l. 8, <em>for</em> “Zeloudvit” <em>read</em> “Zelouide et,” l. 19, <em>for</em> “Rose-Tree” <em>read</em> “Nose-Tree,” l. 13 from bottom, <em>for</em> “Little Fairy” <em>read</em> “Little Fairly.”</p>
			<p>P. 511, l. 22, <em>for</em> “Nouronnihar” <em>read</em> “Nouronihar,” l. 8 from bottom, <em>for</em> “Mahommedans” <em>read</em> “Mohammedans,” l. 5–3 from bottom, <em>read</em> “3, <cite>The Count of Hamilton’s Fairy Tales</cite>. Written shortly after the first publication of Galland’s work. There is an English translation among Bohn’s Extra Volumes.”</p>
			<p>P. 513, l. 24 from bottom, <em>read</em> “My, you ought to seen old Henry the Eight,” l. 21 from bottom, <em>for</em> “Nell Gwynne” <em>read</em> “Nell Gwynn,” l. 13 from bottom, <em>for</em> “corn” <em>read</em> “ourn.”</p>
			<p>P. 519, No. 100, <em>omit</em> “?” in columns 10 and 15, substituting blanks.</p>
			<p>P. 532, is of course Sir R. F. Burton’s, and not mine.</p>
			<h3 class="c015">
				<em>GALLAND’S MS. AND TRANSLATIONS (pp. 465–470).</em>
			</h3>
			<p class="c027">P. 468, l. 4 from bottom, Destains’ “Mille et une Nuits,” should be noticed on p. 472, after l. 2. The full title is as follows:—</p>
			<p>
				<span xml:lang="fr"><cite>Les Mille et une Nuits</cite>, Contes Arabes, Traduits en François par Galland, Nouvelle édition revue sur les textes orientaux et augmentée de plusieurs nouvelles et contes traduites des langues orientaux, par M. Destains, précédée d’un notice historique sur Galland par M. Charles Nodier. Paris, 1822.</span>
			</p>
			<p>This edition is in 6 vols. 8vo, and proves to be of no special interest. The first 5 vols. contain the ordinary version of Galland, and the 6th vol. contains a selection of tales translated from Scott’s vol. 6, eked out with Chavis and Cazotte’s Story of Habib. (No. 250 of our Table).</p>
			<h3 class="c015">
				<em>ZOTENBERG’S WORK ON ALADDIN AND ON VARIOUS MANUSCRIPTS OF THE NIGHTS.</em>
			</h3>
			<p class="c027">One of the most important works which has appeared lately in connection with the Thousand and one Nights, is the following:</p>
			<p>
				<span xml:lang="fr"><cite>Histoire d’ ‘Alâ Al-Dîn ou la Lampe Merveilleuse.</cite> Texte Arabe publié avec une notice sur quelques manuscrits des Mille et une Nuits par H. Zotenberg, roy. 8vo, Paris, Imprimérie Nationale, 1888, p., 70.</span>
			</p>
			<p>The publication of this work puts an end to the numerous conjectures of scholars as to the source of Galland’s unidentified tales; and the notes on various MSS. of the Nights are also very valuable. It therefore appears desirable to give a tolerably full sketch of the contents of the book.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8177" id="noteref-8177" epub:type="noteref">8177</a></p>
			<p>M. Zotenberg begins with general remarks, and passes on to discuss Galland’s edition (section 1). Although Galland frequently speaks of Oriental tales<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8178" id="noteref-8178" epub:type="noteref">8178</a> in his journal, kept at Constantinople in 1672 and 1673, yet as he informs us, in his Dedication to the Marquise d’ O., he only succeeded in obtaining from Syria a portion of the MS. of the Nights themselves with considerable difficulty after his return to France.</p>
			<p>There is some doubt as to the date of appearance of the first 6 vols. of Galland’s “Mille et une Nuit.” According to Caussin de Perceval, vols. 1 and 2 were published together in 1704, and vols. 3 and 4 in the course of the same year. Nevertheless, in the copy in the Bibliothèque Nationale, vols. 1 and 4 are dated 1704, and vols. 2, 5 and 6 are dated 1705; vol. 3 is missing, just as we have only odd volumes of the 2nd, 3rd and 4th English editions in the British Museum, the 1st being still quite unknown.</p>
			<p>M. Zotenberg proceeds to give an account of Galland’s MS. (cf. Nights, x. App. p. 465), and illustrates it by a specimen page in facsimile. Judging from the character of the writing, &amp;c., he considers it to have been transcribed about the second half of the 14th century (Sir R. F. Burton suggests about <span class="fss">A.D.</span> 1384). It is curious that there is a MS. of the 15th century in the Library of the Vatican, which appears to be almost a counterpart of Galland’s, and likewise contains only the first 282 Nights. Galland’s MS. wants a leaf extending from part of Night 102 to the beginning of Night 104, and containing an account of the Hunchback and his buffooneries; this hiatus is filled up in the Vatican MS.</p>
			<p>Habìcht’s version is noted as more approaching Galland’s MS. than do the texts founded on the Egyptian texts; but in thus speaking, Zotenberg does not notice the assertion that Habìcht’s MS., though obtained at Tunis, came originally from Egypt. He considers the ordinary Egyptian texts to be generally abridged and condensed.</p>
			<p>Although it is clear that Galland made great use of this MS. for his translation, yet M. Zotenberg points out numerous discrepancies, especially those at the commencement of the work, which led Caussin de Perceval to regard Galland’s work as a mere paraphrase of the original. M. Zotenberg, however (p. 14), writes, “Évidemment, Galland, pour la traduction du commencement du récit, à suivi un texte plus developpé que celui du MS. 1508, texte dont la rédaction égyptienne ne presente qu’un maladroit abrégé.” He quotes other instances which seem to show that Galland had more than one text at his disposal.</p>
			<p>Section II.—At the beginning of the 17th century, only two MS. of the Nights existed in the libraries of Paris, one in Arabic, and the other in Turkish. The Arabic MS. contains 870 Nights, and is arbitrarily divided into 29 sections. M. Zotenberg considers that it was to this MS. that Galland referred, when he said that the complete work was in 36 parts. The tales follow the order of our Table as far as No. 7 (Nos. 2ab, 2ac and 3ba are wanting), the remainder are irregular, and run as follows: 153, 154, 154a, 20; story of Khailedján ibn Hámán, the Persian; Story of the Two Old Men, and of Báz al-Aschháb Abou Lahab; 9, apparently including as episodes 9a, 9aa, 21, 8, 9b, 170, 181r to 181bb, 137, 154 (commencement repeated), 181u to 181bb (repeated), 135a, Adventures of a traveller who entered a pond (étang) and underwent metamorphoses:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8179" id="noteref-8179" epub:type="noteref">8179</a> anecdotes and apothegms; a portion of the Kalila and Dimna?</p>
			<p>The Turkish MS. (in 11 vols.) is made up of several imperfect copies, which have been improperly put together. The bulk is formed by vols. 2–10 which are written in three different hands, and some of which bear date 1046 A.H. The contents of these nine vols. are as follows: Introduction and 1–3, (wanting 2ab); Story of ’Abdallah of Basra; 5; Story of ’Attáf ibn Ismá’il al-Schoqláni of Damascus and the schaikh Abou-’l-Baraka al-Nawwám, 6; Story told by the Christian Merchant (relating to Qamar al-Zamán) during the reign of Sultan Mahmoud, and different from the story known under this title; Story of Ahmad al-Saghir (the little) and Schams al-Qosour; Story of the Young Man of Baghdad and the Bathman (Baigneur, attendant in a Hammám), 7; 153, 21; Story of Khaledjan ibn Maháni; Story of <span xml:lang="ar">سنمنح</span> and <span xml:lang="ar">غوثان</span> (or <span xml:lang="ar">غوثبان</span>); Story of Nour al-Din ‘Ali and of Dounya (or Dinar) of Damascus, 133; Story of Prince Qamar-Khan and of the schaikh ’Ata, of the Sultan Mahmoud-Khán, of Bahrám-Scháh, of ’Abdallah ibn Hilal, of Harout and Marout, &amp;c.; Story of Qowwat al-Qoloub; 9, including as episodes 9a; 8; Story of Moubaref who slept in the bath; (? = 96); and 170; Fables.</p>
			<p>The other volumes (1 and 11 of the MS.) both contain the beginning of the MS. Vol. 1 was written towards the end of the 17th century, and extends about as far Night 55, concluding with No. 7, which follows No. 3. Vol. 11., which once belonged to Galland, includes only a portion of the Introduction. The text of these two fragments is similar, but differs considerably from that of vol. 2 of the MS.; and specimens of the commencement of vols. 1 and 2 are given to shew this. Yet it is singular that Galland does not seem to have used these Turkish volumes; and the second MS. which he actually used, like the 4th vol. of the copy preserved in the Bibliothèque Nationale, appears to be missing.</p>
			<p>M. Zotenberg then remarks on the missing vol. 4 of Galland, and quotes extracts from Galland’s Diary, shewing that Nos. 191, 192 and 192a, which were surreptitiously introduced into his work without his knowledge, and greatly to his annoyance, were translated by Petis de la Croix, and were probably intended to be included in the Thousand and One Days, which was published in 1710. “<span xml:lang="fr">Comme la plupart de ces contes, ils sont tirés de l’ouvrage turc intitulé <span xml:lang="ar">الفرج بعد الشدة</span>, dont ils forment le 6<sup>e</sup>, le 8<sup>e</sup> et le 9<sup>e</sup> récit.</span>” (Zotenberg, p. 27.)</p>
			<p>Then follows Section iii., one of the most important in the book, in which extracts from Galland’s Diary of 1709 are quoted, shewing that he was then in constant communication with a Christian Maronite of Aleppo, named Hanna (Jean), who was brought to Paris by the traveller Paul Lucas, and who related stories to Galland, of which the latter took copious notes, and most of which he worked up into the later volumes of his “Mille et une Nuit” (<i><span xml:lang="la">sic</span></i>). Among these were 193, 194a, 194b, 59, 197, 198, 174, 195, 194c, 196. The following tales he did not use: An Arab story of two cousins, Camar eddin and Bedr el Bodour; the Golden City (another version of the story of the Three Princes, in No. 198, combined with the story of the woman who slew pretenders who were unable to solve a riddle); The Three Princes, the Genius Morhagian, and his Daughters; and the story of the seller of ptisanne (or diet-drinks) and his son Hassan.</p>
			<p>Further extracts from Galland’s Diary are added, extending from the time of Hanna’s departure from Paris between June and October, 1709, and the completion of the 12th volume of the Mille et une Nuit in 1712. These relate to the gradual progress of the work; and to business in connection with it; and Hanna’s name is occasionally mentioned.</p>
			<p>Hanna supplied Galland with a written version of No. 193, and probably of 194 a-c; (<i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> most of the tales in vols. 9 and 10); but the tales in vols. 11 and 12 were apparently edited by Galland from his notes and recollections of Hanna’s narrations. These are Nos. 195, 196, 59, 197 and 198. M. Zotenberg concludes that Hanna possessed a MS. containing all these tales, part of which he copied for Galland, and that this copy, like several other important volumes which Galland is known or believed to have possessed, was lost. M. Zotenberg thinks that we may expect to meet with most of Hanna’s tales either in other copies of the Nights, or in some other collection of the same kind. The latter supposition appears to me to be by far the most probable.</p>
			<p>[Section IV.]—M. Zotenberg proceeds to give an account of one or two very important MSS. of the Nights in the Bibliothèque Nationale. One of these is a MS. which belonged to the elder Caussin, and was carefully copied by Michael Sabbagh from a MS. of Baghdad. Prof. Fleischer, who examined it, states (Journal Asiatique, 1827, t. II., p. 221) that it follows the text of Habicht, but in a more developed form. M. Zotenberg copies a note at the end, finishing up with the word <span xml:lang="ar">كبيكج</span> (Kabíkaj) thrice repeated. This, he explains, “est le nom du génie préposé au régne des insectes. Les scribes, parfois, l’invoquent pour preserver leurs manuscrits de l’atteinte de vers.”</p>
			<p>This MS. was copied at Paris on European paper at the beginning of the century, though Caussin de Perceval was not acquainted with it in 1806, but only with a MS. of the Egyptian redaction. This MS. agrees with Galland’s only as far as the 69th Night. It differs from it in two other points; it contains No. 1c. and the end of No. 3 coincides with the end of Night 69. The contents of Nights 70–1001 are as follows: 246, 4, 5, 6, 20, 7, 153, 21, 170, 247, The Unhappy Lover confined in the Madhouse (probably = 204c), 8, 191, 193, 174, 9, 9b (not 9a, or 9aa) and as episodes, 155, 32, and the story of the two brothers ’Amír and Ghadir, and their children Djamil and Bathina.</p>
			<p>Another MS., used by Chavis and Cazotte, and Caussin de Perceval, was written in the year 1772. It has hitherto been overlooked, because it was erroneously stated in the late M. Reinaud’s Catalogue to be a MS. containing part of the 1001 Nights, extending from Night 282 to Night 631, and copied by Chavis. It is not from Chavis’ hand, and does not form part of the ordinary version of the Nights, but contains the following tales: 174, 248, Story of King Sapor, 246, 3a, 36, 3c, 153, Story of the Intendant, the Interpreter, and the Young Man; 247, 204c, 240, 250, Story of the Caliph and the Fisherman, (probably = 156); the Cat and the Fox, and the Little Bird and the Fowler.</p>
			<p>Another MS., really written by Chavis, commences exactly where Vol. 3 of Galland’s MS. leaves off; <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i> in the middle of No. 21, and extends from Night 281 to Night 631. M. Zotenberg supposes it to have been written to supply the place of the last volume of Galland’s set. It contains the following tales, in addition to the conclusion of No. 21: 170, 247, 204c, 8, 191, 193 and 174. M. Zotenberg suggests that the first part of this MS. may have been copied from Galland’s last volume, which may have existed at the time in private hands.</p>
			<p>The two last MSS. contain nearly the same tales, though with numerous variations. M. Zotenberg discusses the hypothesis of Chavis’ MS. being a translation from the French, and definitely rejects it.</p>
			<p>[Section V.]—Here M. Zotenberg discusses the MSS. of the Nights in general, and divides them into three categories. I. MSS. proceeding from Muslim parts of Asia. These, except the MSS. of Michael Sabbagh and that of Chavis, contain only the first part of the work. They are all more or less incomplete, and stop short in the middle of the text. They are not quite uniform, especially in their readings, but generally contain the same tales arranged in the same order. II. Recent MSS. of Egyptian origin, characterised by a special style, and a more condensed narrative; by the nature and arrangement of the tales; by a great number of anecdotes and fables; and by the early part of the work containing the great romance of chivalry of King Omar Bin Al-Nu’uman. III. MSS. mostly of Egyptian origin, differing as much among themselves in the arrangement of the tales, as do those of the other groups.</p>
			<p>The following MSS. are mentioned as belonging to the first group:—</p>
			<p class="c012">I. Galland’s MS. in the Bibliothèque Nationale, Nos. 1506–1508.</p>
			<p class="c012">II. MS. in the Vatican, No. 782.</p>
			<p class="c012">III. Dr. Russell’s MS. from Aleppo.</p>
			<p class="c012">IV. MS. in the Bibl. Nat. (Suppl. 1715, I. and II.).</p>
			<p class="c012">V. MS. in the Library of Christ Church College, Oxford (No. ccvii.).</p>
			<p class="c012">VI. MS. in the Library of the India Office, London (No. 2699).</p>
			<p class="c012">VII. Sir W. Jones’ MS., used by Richardson.</p>
			<p class="c012">VIII. Rich’s MS. in the Library of the British Museum (Addit. 7404).</p>
			<p class="c012">IX. MS. in Bibl. Nat. (Suppl. 2522 and 2523).</p>
			<p class="c012">X. MS. in Bibl. Nat. (Suppl. 1716).</p>
			<p>The following MSS. are enumerated as belonging to the second group:—</p>
			<p class="c012">I. Salt’s MS. (printed in Calcutta in 4 vols).</p>
			<p class="c012">II.-IV. Three complete MSS. in Bibliothèque Nationale (Suppl. Arabe, Nos. 1717, 1718, 1719).</p>
			<p class="c012">V. Incomplete MS. of Vol. II. in Bibl. Nat. (Suppl. Arabe, Nos. 2198 to 2200).</p>
			<p class="c012">VI. Incomplete MS. of Vol. 4 (Suppl. Arabe, Nos. 2519 to 2521).</p>
			<p class="c012">VII. Odd vol. containing Nights 656 to 1001 (Suppl. Arabe, No. 1721, III).</p>
			<p class="c012">XII. MS. containing Nights 284 to 327. (Suppl. Arabe, No. 1720.)</p>
			<p class="c012">XIII. MS. in British Museum (Oriental MSS., Nos. 1593 to 1598).</p>
			<p class="c012">XIV. Ditto, (Oriental MSS., Nos. 2916 to 2919).</p>
			<p class="c012">XV. Burckhardt’s MS. in the University Library at Cambridge (B. MSS. 106 to 109).</p>
			<p class="c012">XVI. MS. in the Vatican (Nos. 778 to 781).</p>
			<p class="c012">XVII. MS. in the Ducal Library at Gotha.</p>
			<p class="c012">XVIII. Odd vol. in ditto.</p>
			<p class="c012">XIX. MS. in the Royal Library at Munich.</p>
			<p class="c012">XX. Ditto, incomplete (De Sacy’s).</p>
			<p class="c012">XXI. Fragment in the Library of the Royal and Imperial Library at Vienna (No. CL.).</p>
			<p class="c012">XXII. MS. in the Imperial Public Library at St. Petersburg (Von Hammer’s).</p>
			<p class="c012">XXIII. MS. in the Library of the Institute for the Study of Oriental languages at St. Petersburg (Italinski’s).</p>
			<p class="c012">XXIV. Dr. Clarke’s MS. (cf. Nights, x., App. pp. 502–506).</p>
			<p class="c012">XXV. Caussin de Perceval’s MS</p>
			<p class="c012">XXVI. Sir W. Ouseley’s MSS.</p>
			<p>The above list does not include copies or fragments in various libraries of which M. Zotenberg has no sufficient information, nor miscellaneous collections in which tales from the Nights are mixed with others.</p>
			<p>Portions of Habicht’s MS. appear to belong to the Egyptian recension, and others to have come from further East.</p>
			<p>There is a MS. in the Bibliothèque Nationale (Suppl. Arabe, No. 1721, IV.) from Egypt, containing the first 210 Nights, which somewhat resembles Habicht’s MS. both in style and in the arrangement of the tales. The Third Shaykh’s Story (No. 1 c.) is entirely different from those in the ordinary MSS., nor is it the same as that in the Turkish version of the Nights, which is again quite different from either. In this MS. (No. 1721, IV.) No. 6 is followed by Nos. 7, 174, and 133.</p>
			<p>Then follow notices of Anderson’s MS., used by Scott, but which cannot now be traced; the Calcutta edition of the first 200 Nights; and of the Wortley Montague MS. These form M. Zotenberg’s third group of MSS.</p>
			<p>M. Zotenberg does not enter into the question of the original form, date and constituents of the primitive work, but concludes that the complete work as we now have it, only assumed its present form at a comparatively recent period. But it must not be forgotten that the details, description, manners, and style of the tales composing this vast collection, are undergoing daily alteration both from narrators and copyists.</p>
			<p>Then follows an Appendix, in which M. Zotenberg has copied two tales from Galland’s journals, which he took down as related by the Maronite Hanna. One of these is new to me; it is the story of the Three Princes, and the Genius Morhagian and his Daughters (added at the end of this section); and the other is the well-known story of the Envious Sisters.</p>
			<p>The remainder of M. Zotenberg’s volume contains the Arabic text of the story of ’Ala Al-Din, or the Wonderful Lamp, with numerous critical notes, most of which refer to Galland’s version. A few pages of Chavis’ text are added for comparison.</p>
			<p>The story itself, M. Zotenberg remarks, is modern, giving a faithful picture of Egyptian manners under the reign of the last Mamlouk Sultans. Some expressions which occur in the French-Arabic Dictionary of Ellions Bocthor and of A. Caussin de Perceval, are apparently derived from the story of ’Ala Al-Din.</p>
			<div>
				<h3 class="c015">
					<em>STORY OF THE THREE PRINCES AND THE GENIUS MORHAGIAN AND HIS DAUGHTERS.</em>
				</h3>
			</div>
			<p class="c016">[Reprinted by M. Zotenberg (pp. 53–61) from Galland’s Journal, MS. français, No. 15277, pp. 120–131.] The passages in brackets are added by the present translator (chiefly where Galland has inserted “etc.”) to fill up the sense.</p>
			<p>When the Sultan of Samarcand had reached a great age, he called the three princes, his sons, and after observing that he was much pleased to see how much they loved and revered him, he gave them leave to ask for whatever they most desired. They had only to speak, and he was ready to grant them whatever they asked, let it be what it might, on the sole condition that he should satisfy the eldest first, and the two younger ones afterwards, each in his turn. The eldest prince, whose name was Rostam, begged the Sultan to build him a cabinet of bricks of gold and silver alternately, and roofed with all kinds of precious stones.</p>
			<p>The Sultan issued his orders that very day, but before the roof of the cabinet was finished, indeed before any furniture had been put into it, Prince Rostam asked his father’s leave to sleep there. The Sultan tried to dissuade him, saying that [the roof] ought to be finished first; but the prince was so impatient that he ordered his bed to be removed there, and he lay down. He was reading the Koran about midnight, when suddenly the floor opened and he beheld a most hideous genius named Morhagian rise from the ground, who cried out, “You are a prince, but even if you were the Sultan himself, I would not refrain from taking vengeance for your rashness in entering this house which has been built just above the palace of my eldest daughter.” At the same time he paced around the cabinet, and struck its walls, when the whole cabinet was reduced to dust so fine that the wind carried it away, and left not a trace of it. The prince drew his sword, and pursued the genius, who took to flight until he came to a well, into which he plunged [and vanished]. When the prince appeared before his father the Sultan next morning, he was overwhelmed with confusion [not only at what had happened, but on account of his disobedience to his father, who reproached him severely for having disregarded his advice.]</p>
			<p>The second prince, whose name was Gaiath Eddin (Ghayáth al-Dín), then requested the Sultan to build him a cabinet constructed entirely of the bones of fishes. The Sultan ordered it to be built, at great expense. Prince Gaiath Eddin had no more patience to wait till it was quite finished than his brother Rostam. He lay down in the cabinet, notwithstanding the Sultan’s warnings, but took care to keep his sword by his side. The genius Morhagian appeared to him also at midnight, paid him the same compliment, and told him that the cabinet was built over the palace of his second daughter. He reduced it to dust, and Prince Gaiath Eddin pursued him, sword in hand, to the well, where he escaped; and next day the prince appeared before his father, the Sultan [as crestfallen as his brother].</p>
			<p>The third prince, who was named Badialzaman (Badíu ’l-Zamán = Rarity of the Age), obtained leave from the Sultan to build a cabinet entirely of rock crystal. He went to sleep there before it was entirely finished, but without saying anything to the Sultan, as he was resolved to see whether Morhagian would treat him in the same way. Morhagian arrived at midnight, and declared that the cabinet was built over the palace of his third daughter. He destroyed the cabinet, and when the prince seized his sword, Morhagian took to flight. The prince wounded him three times before he reached the well, but he nevertheless succeeded in escaping.</p>
			<p>Prince Badialzaman did not present himself to the Sultan, but went to the two princes, his brothers, and urged them to pursue the genius in the well itself. The three went together, and the eldest was let down into the well by a rope, but after descending a certain distance, he cried out, and asked to be drawn up again. He excused his failure by saying that he felt a burning heat [and was almost suffocated]. The same thing happened to Prince Gaiath Eddin, who likewise cried out till he was drawn up. Prince Badialzaman then had himself let down but commanded his brothers not to draw him up again, even if he should cry out. They let him down, and he cried out, but he continued to descend till he reached the bottom of the well, when he untied himself from the rope, and called out to his brothers that the air was very foul. At the bottom of the well he found an open door, and he advanced for some distance between two walls, at the end of which he found a golden door, which he opened, and beheld a magnificent palace. He entered and passed through the kitchen and the storerooms, which were filled with all kinds of provisions, and then inspected the rooms, when he entered one magnificently furnished with sofas and divans. He was curious to find out who lived there, so he hid himself. Soon afterwards he beheld a flight of doves alight at the edge of a basin of water in the middle of the court. The doves plunged into the water, and emerged from it as women, each of whom immediately set about her appointed work. One went to the store room, another to the kitchen, a third began to sweep [and so on]. They prepared a feast [as if for expected guests]. Some time afterwards, Badialzaman beheld another flight of ten doves of different colours, who surrounded an eleventh, which was quite white, and these also perched on the edge of the basin. The ten doves plunged into the basin and came forth as women, more beautiful than the first and more magnificently robed. They took the white dove and plunged her into a smaller basin, which was [filled with] rose [water] and she became a woman of extraordinary beauty. She was the eldest daughter of the genius, and her name was Fattane. (Fattánah = The Temptress.)</p>
			<p>Two of her attendants then took Fattane under the armpits, and led her to her apartment, followed by the others. She took her seat on a small raised sofa, and her women separated, some to the right and some to the left, and set about their work. Prince Badialzaman had dropped his handkerchief. One of the waiting women saw it and picked it up, and when she looked round, she saw the prince. She was alarmed, and warned Fattane, who sent some of her women to see who the stranger was. The prince came forward, and presented himself before Fattane, who beheld a young prince, and gave him a most gracious reception. She made him sit next to her, and inquired what brought him there? He told his story from the beginning to the end, and asked where he could find the genius, on whom he wished to take vengeance. Fattane smiled, and told him to think no more about it, but only to enjoy himself in the good company in which he found himself. They spread the table, and she made him sit next to her, and her women played on all kinds of musical instruments before they retired to rest.</p>
			<p>Fattane persuaded the prince to stay with her from day to day: but on the fortieth day he declared that he could wait no longer, and that it was absolutely necessary for him to find out where Morhagian dwelt. The princess acknowledged that he was her father, and told him that his strength was so great [that nobody could overcome him]. She added that she could not inform him where to find him, but that her second sister would tell him. She sent one of her women to guide him to her sister’s palace through a door of communication, and to introduce him. He was well received by the fairy, for whom he had a letter, and he found her younger and more beautiful than Fattane. He begged her to inform him where he could find the genius, but she changed the subject of conversation, entertained him magnificently, and kept him with her for forty days. On the fortieth day she permitted him to depart, gave him a letter, and sent him to her youngest sister, who was a still more beautiful fairy. He was received and welcomed with joy. She promised to show him Morhagian’s dwelling, and she also entertained him for forty days. On the fortieth day she tried to dissuade him from his enterprise, but he insisted. She told him that Morhagian would grasp his head in one hand, and his feet in the other, and would tear him asunder in the middle. But this did not move him, and she then told him that he would find Morhagian in a dwelling, long, high and wide in proportion to his bulk. The prince sought him out, and the moment he caught sight of him, he rushed at him, sword in hand. Morhagian stretched out his hand, seized his head in one hand and his feet in the other, rent him in two with very little effort, and threw him out of a window which overlooked a garden.</p>
			<p>Two women sent by the youngest princess each took a piece of the body of the prince, and brought it to their mistress, who put them together, reunited them, and restored life to the prince by applying water [of life?] to the wounds. She then asked the prince where he came from, and it seemed to him that he had just awakened from sleep; and she then recalled everything to his recollection. But this did not weaken his firm resolve to kill the genius. The fairy begged him to eat, but he refused; and she then urged that Morhagian was her father, and that he could only be killed by his own sword, which the prince could not obtain.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8180" id="noteref-8180" epub:type="noteref">8180</a> “You may say what you please,” answered the prince; “but there is no help for it, and he must die by my hand [to atone for the wrongs which my brothers and I have suffered from him].”</p>
			<p>Then the princess made him swear solemnly to take her as his bride, and taught him how he might succeed in killing the genius. “You cannot hope to kill him while he wakes,” said she, “but when he sleeps it is not quite impossible. If he sleeps, you will hear him snore, but he will sleep with his eyes open, which is a sign that he has fallen into a very profound slumber. As he fills the whole room, step upon him and seize his sword which hangs above his head, and then strike him on the neck. The blow will not kill him, but as he wakes, he will tell you to strike him a second time. But beware of doing this, [for if you strike him again, the wound will heal of itself, and he will spring up and kill you, and me after you].”</p>
			<p>Then Badialzaman returned to Morhagian’s room, and found him snoring so loud that everything around him shook. The prince entered, though not without trembling, and walked over him till he was able to seize the sword when he struck him a violent blow on the neck. Morhagian awoke, cursing his daughter, and cried out to the prince, whom he recognised, “Make an end of me.” The prince answered that what he had done was enough, and he left him, and Morhagian died.</p>
			<p>The prince carried off Morhagian’s sword, which he thought would be useful to him in other encounters; and as he went, he passed a magnificent stable in which he saw a splendid horse. He returned to the fairy and related to her what he had done, and added that he would like to carry off the horse, but he feared it would be very difficult. “Not so difficult as you think,” said she. “Go and cut off some hair from his tail, and take care of it, and whenever you are in need, burn one or two of the hairs, and he will be with you immediately [and will bring you whatever you require].”</p>
			<p>After this the three fairies assembled together, and the prince promised that the two princes, his brothers, should marry the other two sisters. Each fairy reduced her palace to the size of a small ball, which she gave to the prince.</p>
			<p>The prince then took the three fairies to the bottom of the well. His father, the Sultan, had long believed that he was dead, and had put on mourning for him. His two brothers often came to the well, and they happened to be there just at the time. Badialzaman attracted their attention by his shouts, told them what had happened, and added that he had brought the three fairies with him. He asked for a rope and fastened the eldest fairy to it, calling out, “Pull away, Prince Rostam, I send you your good fortune.” The rope was let down again, and he fastened the second fairy to it, calling out “Brother Gaiath Eddin, pull up your good fortune too.”</p>
			<p>The third fairy, who was to marry Badialzaman, begged him to allow himself to be drawn up before her [as she was distrustful of his brothers], but he would not listen to her. As soon as the two princes had drawn her up so high that they could see her, they began to dispute who should have her. Then the fairy cried out to Badialzaman, “Prince, did I not warn you of this?”</p>
			<p>The princes were obliged to agree that the Sultan should settle their dispute. When the third fairy had been drawn out of the well, the three fairies endeavoured to persuade the two princes to draw up their youngest brother, but they refused, and compelled them to follow them. While they carried off the youngest princess, the other two asked leave to say adieu to prince Badialzaman. They cried out from the top of the well, “Prince, have patience till Friday, when you will see six bulls pass by—three red ones and three black ones. Mount upon one of the red ones and he will bring you up to the earth, but take good care not to mount upon a black one, for he would carry you down to the Seventh Earth.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8181" id="noteref-8181" epub:type="noteref">8181</a></p>
			<p>The princes carried off the three fairies, and on Friday, three days afterwards, the six bulls appeared. Badialzaman was about to mount upon a red one, when a black one prevented him, and compelled him to mount his back, when he plunged through the earth till he stopped at a large town in another world. He entered the town, and took up his abode with an old woman, to whom he gave a piece of gold to provide him with something to eat, for he was almost famished. When he had eaten enough, he asked for something to drink. “You cannot be a native of this country,” said the old woman [“or you would not ask for drink”]. She then brought him a sponge, saying that she had no other water. She then informed him that the town was supplied with water from a very copious spring, the flow of which was interrupted by a monster. They were obliged to offer up a girl to be devoured by it on every Friday. To-day the princess, the Sultan’s daughter, was to be given up to him, and while the monster emerged from his lair to devour her, enough water would flow for everyone to supply himself until the following Friday.</p>
			<p>Badialzaman then requested the old woman to show him the way to the place where the princess was already exposed; but she was so much afraid that he had much trouble in persuading her to come out of her house to show him what direction to take. He went out of the town, and went on till he saw the princess who made a sign to him from a distance to approach no nearer; and the nearer he came, the more anxiety she displayed. As soon as he was within hearing, he shouted to her not to be afraid; and he sat down beside her, and fell asleep, after having begged her to wake him as soon as the monster appeared. Presently a tear from the princess fell upon his face, and he woke up, and saw the monster, which he slew with the sword of Morhagian, and the water flowed in abundance. The princess thanked her deliverer, and begged him to take her back to the Sultan her father, who would give proofs of his gratitude; but he excused himself. She then marked his shoulder with the blood of the monster without his noticing it. The princess then returned to the town, and was led back to the palace, where she related to the Sultan [all that had happened]. Then the Sultan commanded that all the men in the town should pass before himself and the princess under pain of death. Badialzaman tried to conceal himself in a khan, but he was compelled to come with the others. The princess recognised him, and threw an apple at him to point him out. He was seized, and brought before the Sultan, who demanded what he could do to serve him. The prince hesitated, but at length he requested the Sultan to show him the way to return to the world from whence he came. The Sultan was furious, and would have ordered him to be burned as a heretic [but the princess interceded for his life]. The Sultan then treated him as a madman, and drove him ignominiously from the town, and he wandered away without knowing where he was going. At length he arrived at a mountain of rock, where he saw a great serpent rising from his lair to prey on young Rokhs. He slew the serpent with the sword of Morhagian, and the father and mother of the Rokhs arrived at the moment, and asked him to demand whatever he desired in return. He hesitated awhile, but at length he asked them to show him the way to the upper world. The male Rokh then told him to prepare ten quarters of mutton, to mount on his back, and to give him some of the meat whenever he should turn his head either to one side or to the other on the journey.</p>
			<p>The prince mounted on the back of the Rokh, the Rokh stamped with his foot, and the earth opened before them wherever he turned. They reached the bottom of the well when the Rokh turned his head, but there was no more meat left, so the prince cut off the calf of his leg, and give it to him. When the Rokh arrived at the top of the well, the prince leaped to the ground, when the Rokh perceived [that he was lame, when he inquired the reason, and the prince explained what had happened]. The Rokh then disgorged the calf of the leg, and returned it to its place, when it grew fast, and the prince was cured immediately.</p>
			<p>As the prince left the well, he met a peasant, and changed clothes with him, but he kept the sword, the three balls, and the horse-hair. He went into the town, where he took lodgings with a tailor, and kept himself in retirement. The prince gradually rose in the tailor’s esteem by letting him perceive that he knew how to sew, [and all the arts of an accomplished tailor]. Presently, preparations were made for the wedding of Prince Rostam, and the tailor with whom Badialzaman lodged was ordered to prepare the fairy’s robes. Badialzaman, who slept in the shop, took clothes from one of the balls similar to those which were already far advanced, and put them in the place of the others. The tailor was astonished [at their fine workmanship] and wished to take the prince with him to receive a present, but he refused, alleging as an excuse that he had so lately come to the town. When the fairies saw the clothes, they thought it a good omen.</p>
			<p>The wedding day arrived, and they threw the jaríd,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8182" id="noteref-8182" epub:type="noteref">8182</a> [and practised other martial exercises]. It was a grand festival, and all the shops were closed. The tailor wished to take the prince to see the spectacle, but he put him off with an excuse. However, he went to a retired part of the town, where he struck fire with a gun,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8183" id="noteref-8183" epub:type="noteref">8183</a> and burned a little of the horse-hair. The horse appeared, and he told him to bring him a complete outfit all in red, and that he should likewise appear with trappings, jewels &amp;c., and a reed (jaríd) of the same colour. The prince then mounted the horse, and proceeded to the race-course, where his appearance excited general admiration. At the close of the sports, he cut off the head of Prince Rostam, and the horsemen pursued him, but were unable to overtake him, and soon lost sight of him. He returned to the shop dressed as usual before the arrival of the tailor, who related to him what had happened, of which he pretended to be entirely ignorant. There was a great mourning at the court; but three months afterwards, fresh robes were ordered for the wedding of the second prince. The fairies were confirmed in their suspicions when they saw the fresh clothes [which Badialzaman sent them].</p>
			<p>On the wedding day they again assembled to throw the jaríd. Prince Badialzaman now presented himself on the white horse, robed in white, and with pearls and jewels to match, and again he attracted general admiration. He pushed himself into the midst of a guard of eight hundred horsemen, and slew Gaiath Eddin. They rushed upon him, and he allowed himself to be carried before the Sultan, who recognised him, [and pronounced his decision], “A brother who has been abandoned to die by his brothers, has a right to kill them.”</p>
			<p>After this, Prince Badialzaman espoused the youngest princess, and the two others were given in marriage to two princes who were related to the Sultan.</p>
			<div>
				<h3 class="c015">
					<em>CAZOTTE’S CONTINUATION, AND THE COMPOSITE EDITIONS OF THE ARABIAN NIGHTS (pp. 470–475).</em>
				</h3>
			</div>
			<p class="c027">P. 475.—There is a small Dutch work, the title of which is as follows:</p>
			<p><span xml:lang="nl"><cite>Oostersche Vertellingen, uit de Duizend-en-een-Nacht</cite>: Naar de Hoogduitsche Bewerking van M. Claudius,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8184" id="noteref-8184" epub:type="noteref">8184</a> voor de Nederlandsche Jeugduiitgegeven door J. J. A. Gouverneur. Te Groningen, bij B. Wolters</span> (n.d. 8vo.), pp. 281, col. front. (illustrating No. 170).</p>
			<p>A composite juvenile edition, including Introduction (very short), and Nos. 251g, 36a, 163 (complete form), 6ef, 4, 5, 1, 52, 170, 6ee, 223, 207c, 6, 194c, 206a, 204h, 2a, 174a and Introduction, (a.)</p>
			<p>Derived from at least four different sources.</p>
			<h3 class="c015">
				<em>TRANSLATIONS OF THE PRINTED TEXTS (pp. 495–496).</em>
			</h3>
			<p class="c027">Under this heading I have to record Sir Richard and Lady Burton’s own works.</p>
			<p><em>Lady Burton’s Edition of her husband’s Arabian Nights</em>, translated literally from the Arabic, prepared for household reading by Justin Huntly Mc.Carthy, M.P., London, Waterlow and Sons, Roy. 8vo. 6 vols.</p>
			<p>In preparing this edition for the press, as much as possible has been retained, both of the translation and notes; and it has not been found necessary to omit altogether more than a very few of the least important tales. The contents of the 6 volumes are as follows:—</p>
			<p>Vol I. (1886), Frontispiece (Portrait of Lady Burton), Preface, Translator’s Foreword, Introduction, 1–9 (pp. xxiii. 476).</p>
			<p>Vol. II. (1886), Frontispiece (Portrait of Sir Richard F. Burton), 9 (continued), 9a–29 (pp. ii. 526).</p>
			<p>Vol. III. (1887), 29 (continued)–133e (pp. viii. 511).</p>
			<p>Vol. IV. (1887), 133e (continued)–154a (pp. iv. 514).</p>
			<p>Vol. V. (1887), 154a (continued)–163 (pp. iv. 516).</p>
			<p>Vol. VI. (1886) [? 1888], 163 (continued)–169 (pp. ii. 486).</p>
			<p>Also includes Terminal Essay, Index to Tales and Proper Names; Contributions to Bibliography, as far as it relates to Galland’s MS. and Translations!; Comparative Table of Tales; Opinions of the Press; and Letters from Scholars.</p>
			<p><em>Supplemental Nights to the Book of the Thousand Nights and a Night</em>, with notes anthropological and explanatory, by Richard F. Burton. Benares, printed by the Kamashastra Society for private subscribers only. Roy. 8vo.</p>
			<p>The contents of the 6 volumes are as follows:</p>
			<p>Vol. I. (1886) Translator’s Foreword, 170–181bb (pp. xi. 370).</p>
			<p>Vol. II. (1886) 182–189. Appendix: Variants and analogues of some of the tales in vols. i. and ii., by Mr. W. A. Clouston (pp. ix. 392).</p>
			<p>These two volumes contain the tales peculiar to the Breslau Text, and cover the same ground as Mr. Payne’s 3 vols. of “Tales from the Arabic.”</p>
			<p>Vol. III. (1887) Foreword, 191–198. Appendix: Variants and Analogues of the Tales in the Supplemental Nights, vol. iii., by Mr. W. A. Clouston (pp. xvi. 661).</p>
			<p>This volume, the bulkiest of the whole series, contains such of Galland’s tales as are not to be found in the ordinary texts of the Nights.</p>
			<p>Vol. IV. (1887) The Translator’s Foreword, 203–209; App. A. Ineptiæ Bodleianæ; App. B. The three untranslated tales in Mr. E. J. W. Gibb’s “Forty Vezirs” (pp. xv., 381).</p>
			<p>Vol. V. (1888) 210–241a, Translator’s Foreword; App. i. Catalogue of Wortley Montague Manuscript; Contents; App. ii. Notes on the Stories contained in vols. iv. and v. of Supplemental Nights, by Mr. W. F. Kirby (pp. viii. 515).</p>
			<p>These two volumes contain tales translated from the Wortley Montague MS., used by Jonathan Scott, and now in the Bodleian Library at Oxford. The following tales, not in our table, are added:—</p>
			<p>Vol. IV. Story of the Limping Schoolmaster (between 204i and 204j).</p>
			<p>How Drummer Abu Kasim became a Kazi, and Story of the Kazi and his Slipper. (These two tales come between 206a and 206b.)</p>
			<p>Adventure of the Fruit-seller and the Concubine (between 207c and 207d).</p>
			<p>Tale of the third Larrikin concerning himself (between 208 and 209).</p>
			<p>On the other hand, a few tales in the MS. are omitted as repetitions, or as too unimportant to be worth translating:—</p>
			<p>Vol. VI. (1888). Translators Foreword: 248; 246; The Linguist-Dame, the Duenna, and the King’s Son; 247; The Pleasant History of the Cock and the Fox; History of what befel the Fowl-let with the Fowler; 249; 250.</p>
			<p>App. i. Index to the Tales and Proper Names; ii. Alphabetical Table of the Notes (Anthropological, &amp;c.); iii. Notes on the Stories contained in vol. vi. of Supplementary Nights, by W. F. Kirby; iv. Additional Notes on the Bibliography of the Thousand and One Nights, by W. F. Kirby (pp. 201, 384.); v. The Biography of the Book and the Reviewers Reviewed, Opinions of the Press.</p>
			<p>This volume contains the originals of Chavis and Cazotte’s Tales, omitting the four doubtful ones (cf. Nights, x. App., pp. 470, 471).</p>
			<h3 class="c015">
				<em>COLLECTIONS OF SELECTED TALES (pp. 496–497.)</em>
			</h3>
			<p class="c027">“We have also ‘Aladdin or the Wonderful Lamp,’ ‘Sindbad the Sailor, or the Old Man of the Sea’ and ‘Ali Baba, or the Forty Thieves,’ revised by M. E. Braddon, author of ‘Lady Audley’s Secret,’ etc. Illustrated by Gustav Doré and other artists. London: J. &amp; R. Maxwell.</p>
			<p>“Miss Braddon has contented herself with ‘Englishing’ the vulgar version, whose Gallicisms are so offensive to the national ear.” (Sir R. F. Burton, <em>in litt.</em>)</p>
			<h3 class="c015"><em>IMITATIONS AND MISCELLANEOUS WORKS HAVING MORE OR LESS CONNECTION WITH THE NIGHTS.</em> (Pp. 507–513.) B. <em>ENGLISH</em> (pp. 512, 513.)</h3>
			<p class="c027">13. <em>History of Rhedi, the Hermit of Mount Ararat, an Oriental Tale.</em> <em>By—Mackenzie</em>, 16mo., Dublin, 1781.</p>
			<p>I have not seen this little book.</p>
			<p>14. <em>Miscellanies, consisting of poems, classical extracts, Oriental Apologues. By William Beloe, F.S.A, Translator of Herodotus, &amp;c.</em> London, 1795.</p>
			<p>Includes some genuine Oriental tales, such as a version of that of Básim the Smith.</p>
			<p>15. <em>The Orientalist, Letters of a Rabbi, with Notes by James Noble, Oriental Master in the Scottish Naval and Military Academy.</em> Edinburgh, 1831.</p>
			<p>Noticed by Mr. W. A. Clouston, Suppl. Nights, iii., p. 573.</p>
			<p>16. <em>The Adventures of the Caliph Haroun Al-raschid. Recounted by the Author of “Mary Powell” [Miss Manning].</em> 8vo., London, 1855; Arthur Hall, Virtue &amp; Co.</p>
			<p>17. <cite>The 1001 Days, a Companion to the Arabian Nights</cite>, with introduction by Miss [J.] Pardoe. 8vo, London, 1857, woodcuts.</p>
			<p>A miscellaneous collection (partly derived from “Les Mille et un Jours”) (cf. Nights, x., pp. 499, 500). I have also seen a similar miscellaneous collection in French under the latter title. The tales in the English work are as follows:</p>
			<dl class="dl_3">
				<dt>I.</dt>
				<dd>Hassan Abdallah, or the Enchanted Keys.</dd>
				<dt> </dt>
				<dd>Story of Hassan.</dd>
				<dt> </dt>
				<dd>Story of the Basket Maker.</dd>
				<dt> </dt>
				<dd>Story of the Dervise Abounader.</dd>
				<dt>II.</dt>
				<dd>Soliman Bey and the Story Tellers.</dd>
				<dt> </dt>
				<dd>The First Story Teller.</dd>
				<dt> </dt>
				<dd>The Second Story Teller.</dd>
				<dt> </dt>
				<dd>The Third Story Teller.</dd>
				<dt>III.</dt>
				<dd>Prince Khalaf and the Princess of China.</dd>
				<dt> </dt>
				<dd>Story of Prince Al-Abbas.</dd>
				<dt> </dt>
				<dd>Story of Liri-in.</dd>
				<dt>IV.</dt>
				<dd>The Wise Dey.</dd>
				<dt>V.</dt>
				<dd>The Tunisian Sage.</dd>
				<dt>VI.</dt>
				<dd>The Nose for Gold.</dd>
				<dt>VII.</dt>
				<dd>The Treasures of Basra.</dd>
				<dt> </dt>
				<dd>History of Aboulcassem.</dd>
				<dt>VIII.</dt>
				<dd>The Old Camel.</dd>
				<dt>IX.</dt>
				<dd>The Story of Medjeddin (Grimm’s “Haschem,” cf. Nights, x. pp. 474, 475).</dd>
				<dt>X.</dt>
				<dd>King Bedreddin Lolo and his Vizier.</dd>
				<dt> </dt>
				<dd>Story of the Old Slippers.</dd>
				<dt> </dt>
				<dd>Story of Atalmulk, surnamed the Sorrowful Vizier, and the Princess Zelica.</dd>
				<dt> </dt>
				<dd>Story of Malek and the Princess Schirine.</dd>
			</dl>
			<p>18. <cite>The Modern Arabian Nights.</cite> By Arthur A’ Beckett and Linley Sambourne. London: Bradbury, Agnew &amp; Co., 1877, sm. 4to., with comic coloured frontispieces and woodcuts.</p>
			<p class="c031">Four clever satires (social and political) as follows:</p>
			<dl class="dl_4">
				<dt>1.</dt>
				<dd>Alley Baber and Son, a Mock Exchange Story.</dd>
				<dt>2.</dt>
				<dd>Ned Redding and the Beautiful Persian.</dd>
				<dt>3.</dt>
				<dd>The Ride of Captain Alf Rashit to Ke-Vere-Street.</dd>
				<dt>4.</dt>
				<dd>Mr. O’Laddin and the Wonderful Lamp.</dd>
			</dl>
			<p>19. <cite>Tales of the Caliph.</cite> By Al Arawiyah, 8vo., London, T. Fisher Unwin, 1887.</p>
			<p>Belongs to Class 5 (Imitations). Consists of fictitious adventures supposed to have happened to Harun Al Rashid, chiefly during his nocturnal rambles.</p>
			<h3 class="c015">
				<em>SEPARATE EDITIONS OF SINGLE OR COMPOSITE TALES (pp. 497–499).</em>
			</h3>
			<p class="c027">P. 498, line 12.—No. 184 was published under the title of “Woman’s Wit” in the “Literary Souvenir” for 1831, pp. 217–237, derived from Langlés’ version (Mr. L. C. Smithers <em>in litt.</em>).</p>
			<h3 class="c015">
				<em>TRANSLATION OF COGNATE ORIENTAL ROMANCES ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE NIGHTS (pp. 499–502).</em>
			</h3>
			<p class="c027">P. 499, No. 1, Les Mille et un Jours.</p>
			<p>Mr. L. C. Smithers (<em>in litt.</em>) notes English editions published in 1781 and 1809, the latter under the title of “The Persian and Turkish Tales.”</p>
			<p>P. 501, No. 5. <cite><span xml:lang="fr">Recueil de Contes Populaires de la Kabylie du Djurdjura</span></cite> recueillis et traduits par J. Rivière. 12mo. Paris: Leroux. 1882.</p>
			<p>This collection is intended to illustrate the habits and ideas of the people. The tales are very short, and probably very much abridged, but many of them illustrate the Nights. I may note the following tales as specially interesting from their connection with the Nights, or with important tales in other collections, Oriental or otherwise.</p>
			<p>Thadhillala. A brief abstract of No. 151.</p>
			<p>Les deux Frères. A variant of Herodotus’ Story of Rhampsinitus.</p>
			<p>L’homme de bien et le méchant. A variant of No. 262; or Schiller’s Fridolin.</p>
			<p>Le Corbeau et l’Enfant. Here a child is stolen and a crow left in its place.</p>
			<p>H’ab Sliman. Here an ugly girl with foul gifts is substituted for her opposite.</p>
			<p>Le roi et son fils. Here we find the counterpart of Schaibar (from No. 197), who, however, is a cannibal and devours everybody.</p>
			<p>Les Enfants et la Chauve-sourie. Resembles No. 198.</p>
			<p>Le Joueur de Flute. Resembles Grimm’s story of the Jew in the Bramble-Bush.</p>
			<p>Jésus-Christ et la femme infidèle. (=261 b.; cf. Nights x., p. 473.)</p>
			<p>Le Roitelet. This is the fable of the Ox and the Frog.</p>
			<p>L’idiot et le coucou (=No. 206a.)</p>
			<p>Moh’amed ben Soltan. This is one of the class of stories known to folklorists as the Punchkin series. The life of a Ghúl is hidden in an egg, the egg in a pigeon, the pigeon in a camel, and the camel in the sea.</p>
			<p>Les deux Frères. A Cinderella story. The slayer of a hydra is discovered by trying on a shoe.</p>
			<p>Les trois Frères. Here a Ghúl is killed by a single blow from a magic dagger, which must not be repeated. (Cf. antea, p. 365; and Nights, vii. p. 361.) In this story, too, the protection of a Ghúlah is secured by tasting her milk, a point which we find in Spitta Bey’s “Contes Arabes Modernes,” but not in the Nights.</p>
			<p>9. <cite>Turkish Evening Entertainments.</cite> “The Wonders of Remarkable Incidents and the Rarities of Anecdotes,” by Ahmed ibn Hemdem the Ketkhoda called “Sobailee.” Translated from the Turkish by John F. Brown. 8vo. New York, 1850.</p>
			<p>Contains a great number of tales and anecdotes, divided into 37 chapters, many of which bear such headings as “Illustrative of intelligence and piety,” “On justice and fostering care,” “Anecdotes about the Abbaside Caliphs,” &amp;c.</p>
			<p>“A translation of the Turkish story-book, ‘Aja’ib al-ma’ásir wa ghará ’ib ennawádir,’ written for Muád the Fourth Ottoman Sultan who reigned between 1623–40. A volume of interesting anecdotes from the Arabic and Persian” (Mr. L. C. Smithers, <em>in litt.</em>)</p>
			<p>10. <cite><span xml:lang="fr">Contes Arabes Modernes, recueillis et traduits par Guillaume Spitta-Bey.</span></cite> 8vo. Leyden and Paris, 1883.</p>
			<p>This book contains 12 orally collected tales of such great importance from a folk-lore point of view that I have given full abstracts of all. They are designed to illustrate the spoken Egyptian dialect, and are printed in Roman character, with translation and glossary. The hero of nearly all the tales is called “Mohammed l’Avisé,” which Mr. Sydney Hartland renders “Prudent,” and Mr. W. A. Clouston “Discreet.” The original gives “Essâtir Mehammed.” (Al-Shátir Mohammed, <i><span xml:lang="la">i.e.</span></i>, M. the Clever) The frequent occurrence of the number 39 (forty less one) may also be noted. Ghúls often play the part which we should expect Jinn to fill. The bear which occurs in two stories, is not an Egyptian animal. Having called attention to these general features we may leave the tales to speak for themselves.</p>
			<h4 class="c032">I. <i><span xml:lang="fr">Histoire de Mohammed l’Avisé.</span></i></h4>
			<p class="c027">Contains the essential features of Cazotte’s story of the Maugraby, (cf. Nights, x., p. 471) with interesting additions. The “Mogrébin” confers three sons on a king and queen, and claims Mohammed, the eldest and the cleverest. He gives him a book to read during his absence of 30 days, but on the 29th day he finds a girl hanging by her hair in the garden, and she teaches him to read it, but not to tell the magician. The latter cuts off his arm, threatening to cut off his head if he cannot read the book within another 30 days. As soon as he is gone, Mohammed reads on his arm again with the book, and escapes with the girl, when they separate and return to their respective homes. Mohammed then changes himself into a sheep for his mother to sell, but warns her not to sell the cord round his neck. Next day he changes himself into a camel, forbidding his mother to sell the bridle; but she is persuaded to do so, and he falls into the hands of the magician. But he contrives to escape in the form of a crow and the magician pursues him for two days and nights in the form of a hawk, when he descends into the garden of the king whose daughter he had rescued from the magician, and changes himself into a pomegranate on a tree. The magician asks for and receives the pomegranate, when it bursts, and the seed containing the life of Mohammed rolls under the king’s throne. The magician changes himself into a cock, and picks up the seeds, but while he is searching for the last, it changes into a dagger, and cuts him in two. The princess acknowledges Mohammed as her deliverer, and they are married.</p>
			<div>
				<h4 class="c032">II. <i><span xml:lang="fr">Histoire de l’Ours de Cuisine.</span></i></h4>
			</div>
			<p class="c027">This begins as a swan-maiden story.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8185" id="noteref-8185" epub:type="noteref">8185</a> A king steals the feather-dress of a bathing maiden, who will only marry him on condition that she shall tear out the eyes of his forty women (39 white slaves and a princess). The king answers, “C’est bien, il n’y a pas d’inconvénient.” The forty blind women are shut up in a room under the kitchen, where they give birth to children whom they cut up and divide; but the princess saves her shares and thus preserves her son, whom she calls “Mohammed l’Avisé,” and teaches to read. He steals food from the kitchen, calling himself “Ours de Cuisine;” the queen hears of him, pretends to be ill, and demands that he shall be sent to fetch the heart of the Bull of the Black Valley. He finds a Ghúleh sitting with her breasts thrown back on her shoulders, so he tastes her milk unperceived, and she at once adopts him as her son. She gives him a ball and a dagger, warning him that if he strikes the bull more than once, he will sink into the earth with him. The ball rolls before him, and when it stops, the bull rises from the ground. Mohammed kills him, refusing to repeat the blow, returns the ball and dagger to the Ghúleh, and returns home. A few days afterwards, the queen sends Mohammed to fetch the heart of the Bull of the Red Valley, and when he informs the Ghúleh, she says, “Does she wish to kill her second brother too?” “Are these her brothers?” asked Mohammed. She answered, “Yes, indeed, they are the sons of the Sultan of the Jánn.” He kills the Bull as before. A fortnight afterwards, the queen hides a loaf of dry bread under her mattress, when its cracking gives rise to the idea that she is very ill, and she complains of great pain in the sides. She demands a pomegranate from the White Valley, where the pomegranates grow to the weight of half a cantar.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8186" id="noteref-8186" epub:type="noteref">8186</a> The Ghúleh tells him she cannot help him, but he must wait for her son Abderrahym. When he arrives he remarks, “Hum! mother, there’s a smell of man about you, bring him here to me to eat for breakfast.” But his mother introduces Mohammed to him as his foster brother, and he becomes friendly at once, but says that the pomegranate is the queen’s sister. He tells Mohammed to get an ardebb of small round loaves in a basket, along with a piece of meat, and a piece of liver. The Ghúl then gives him a rod, saying, “Throw it down, and walk after it. It will knock at the garden gate, which will open, and when you enter you will find great dogs, but throw the bread right and left, without looking back. Beyond a second gate you will find Ghúls; throw bread to them right and left, and after passing them, look up, and you will find a tree in a fountain surrounded with roses and jasmine. You will see a pomegranate upon it. Gather it, and it will thunder, but fear nothing, and go on your way directly, and do not look behind you after passing the gate.” The queen waits another fortnight, and then demands the flying castle from Mount Kaf, intending that her father, who dwelt there, should burn him. The Ghúleh directed Mohammed to dye himself black, and to provide himself with some mastic (ladin) and lupines. With these, he makes friends with a black slave, who takes him into the castle, and shows him a bottle containing the life of the queen; another containing the eyes of the forty women; a magic sword which spares nothing, and the ring which moves the castle. Mohammed then sees a beetle,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8187" id="noteref-8187" epub:type="noteref">8187</a> which the slave begs him not to kill, as it is his life. He watches it till it enters a hole, and as soon as the slave is asleep, he kills it, and the slave dies. Then he lays hands on the talismans, rushes into the room where the inhabitants of the castle are condoling with the king and queen on the loss of their three children, and draws the sword, saying “Strike right and left, and spare neither great nor small.” Having slain all in the castle, Mohammed removes it to his father’s palace, when his father orders the cannons to be fired. Then Mohammed tells his father his history, compels the queen to restore the eyes of the forty women, when they become prettier than before, and then gives her the flask containing her life. But she drops it in her fright, and her life ends, and the king places Mohammed on the throne.</p>
			<h4 class="c032">III. <i><span xml:lang="fr">Histoire de la Dame des Arabes Jasmin.</span></i></h4>
			<p class="c027">A king sends his wazir to obtain a talisman of good luck, which is written for him by Jasmine, the daughter of an Arab Sheikh. The king marries her, although she demands to be weighed against gold, but drives her away for kissing a fisherman in return for a bottle which he has drawn out of the river for her. She goes two days’ journey to a town, where she takes up her abode with a merchant, and then discovers that whenever she turns the stopper of the bottle, food, drink, and finally ten white dancing girls emerge from it. The girls dance, each throws her ten purses of money, and then they retire into the bottle. She builds herself a grand palace, where her husband seeks her, and seeing the new palace, orders that no lights shall be lit in the town that night. She lights up her palace, which convinces the king that he has a dangerous rival. Then the wazir and the king visit her; the king asks for the bottle, and she demands more than a kiss, then reveals herself, puts the king to shame, and they are reconciled.</p>
			<h4 class="c032">IV. <i><span xml:lang="fr">Histoire du Pécheur et de son Fils.</span></i></h4>
			<p class="c027">A king falls in love with the wife of a fisherman, and the wazir advises the former to require the fisherman on pain of death to furnish a large hall with a carpet in a single piece. The fisherman’s wife sends him to the well of Shoubrah where he exclaims, “O such-and-such-a-one, thy sister so-and-so salutes thee, and asks thee to send her the spindle which she forgot when she was with thee yesterday, for we want to furnish a room with it.” The fisherman drives a nail into the floor at one end of the room, fixes the thread on the spindle to it, and draws out a wonderful carpet. Then the wazir demands a little boy eight days old, who shall tell a story of which the beginning shall be a lie and the end a lie. The fisherman is sent to the well with the message, “O such-and-such-a-one, thy sister so-and-so greets thee, and requests thee to give her the child which she brought into the world yesterday.” But the child only cries until three gnats are applied to him, one on each side, and one on the back. Then the boy speaks, saying, “Peace be on thee, O king!” and afterwards tells his lying story: “When I was in the flower of my youth, I walked out of the town one day into the fields when it was very hot. I met a melon-seller, I bought a melon for a mahboub, took it, cut out a piece, and looked inside, when I saw a town with a grand hall, when I raised my feet and stepped into the melon. Then I walked about to look at the people of the town inside the melon. I walked on till I came out of the town into the country. There I saw a date tree bearing dates a yard long. I wished for some, and climbed the date-tree to gather a date and eat it. There I found peasants sowing and reaping on the date-tree, and the threshing wheels were turning to thresh the wheat. I walked on a little, and met a man who was beating eggs to make a poultry yard. I looked on, and saw the chickens hatch; the cocks went to one side and the hens to the other. I stayed near them till they grew up, when I married them to each other, and went on. Presently I met a donkey carrying sesame-cakes, so I cut off a piece and ate it. When I had eaten it, I looked up, and found myself outside the melon, and the melon became whole as it was at first.” Then the child rebukes and threatens the king and the wazir, and the fisherman’s wife sends her husband to take the child back to the well.</p>
			<p>The fisherman had a son named Mohammed l’Avisé (Al-Shátír), who was as handsome as his mother; but the king had a son whose complexion was like that of a Fellah. The boys went to school together, and the prince used to say, “Good day, fisherman’s son,” and Mohammed used to reply, “Good day, O son of the king, looking like a shoe-string.” The prince complained to his father, who ordered the schoolmaster to kill Mohammed, and he bastinadoed him severely. The boy went to his father, and turned fisherman. On the first day he caught a mullet (Fr. <i><span xml:lang="fr">rouget</span></i>), and was about to fry it, when it cried out that it was one of the princesses of the river, and he threw it back. Then the wazir advised the king to send Mohammed to fetch the daughter of the king of the Green Country, seven years journey distant. By the advice of the fish, Mohammed asked the king for a golden galley; and on reaching the Green Country, invited the inhabitants to inspect his galley. At last the princess came down, and he carried her off. When she found she was entrapped, she threw her ring into the sea, which the fish caught. When the king proposed to the princess, she first demanded her ring, which Mohammed immediately presented to the king. Then she said it was the custom of her country on the occasion of a marriage to dig a trench from the palace to the river, which was filled with wood, and set on fire. The bridegroom was required to walk through the trench to the river. The wazir proposed that Mohammed should walk through the trench first; and by the fish’s advice, he stopped his ears, cried out, “In the name of God, the Compassioning, the Merciful,” threw himself into the trench, and returned from the river handsomer than before. So the wazir said to the king, “Send for your son to go with us, that he may become as handsome as Mohammed.” So the three threw themselves into the fire, and were burned to ashes, and Mohammed married the princess.</p>
			<h4 class="c032">V. <i><span xml:lang="fr">Histoire de Dalâl.</span></i></h4>
			<p class="c027">Dalal was a little girl, the daughter of a king, who found a louse on her head, and put it into a jar of oil, where it remained till Dalal was twenty years old, when it burst the jar, and emerged in the form of a horned buffalo. The king ordered the hide to be hung at the gate of the palace, and proclaimed that anyone who could discover what the skin was should marry his daughter, but whoever tried and failed should lose his head. Thirty-nine suitors thus perished, when a Ghúl passed by in the form of a man, who knew the secret. He took Dalal home with him and brought her a man’s head, but as she would not eat it, he brought her a sheep. He then visited her under the forms of her mother and her two aunts, and told her that her husband was a Ghúl; but she refused to believe it until the third visit. Then he was angry; but she begged him to let her go to the bath before she was eaten. He consented, took her to a bath, and sat at the door; but she rubbed herself with mud, changed clothes with an old lupine-seller, and escaped for a time. She reached a palace which she would not enter until she was invited by the Prince himself, who then proposed to marry her, but on the wedding day, her husband, having tracked her out, contrived that another Ghúl in the form of a man should present him to the king in the form of a sheep, pretending that he had been reared in a harem, and would bleat so loud that nobody could sleep, unless he was tethered in the women’s apartments. At night the Ghúl carried off Dalal from beside the prince to the adjoining room, but she begged to be allowed to retire for a few moments, when she called upon Saint Zaynab for help, who sent one of her sisters (?) a Jinniyah. She clove the wall, and asked Dalal to promise to give her her first child. She then gave her a piece of wood to throw into the mouth of the Ghúl when he opened his mouth to eat her.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8188" id="noteref-8188" epub:type="noteref">8188</a> He fell on the ground senseless, and Dalal woke up the prince who slew him. But when Dalal brought forth a daughter whom she gave to the Jinniyah, her mother-in-law declared that Dalal herself was a Ghulah, and she was banished to the kitchen, where she pealed onions for ten years. At the end of this time the Jinniyah again clove the wall, and brought back the young princess, who was introduced to her father, who took Dalal again into favour. Meantime the sultan of the Jinn sent for the Jinniyah, for his son was ill, and could only be cured by a cup of water from the Sea of Emeralds; and this could only be obtained by a daughter of mankind. So the Jinniyah borrowed Dalal’s daughter again, and took her to the sultan, who gave her a cup, and mounted her on a Jinni, warning her not to wet her fingers. But a wave touched the hand of the princess, which turned as green as clover. Every morning the Sea of Emerald is weighed by an officer to discover whether any has been stolen; and as soon as he discovered the deficiency, he took a platter of glass rings and bracelets, and went from palace to palace calling out, “Glass bracelets and rings, O young ladies.” When he came to Dalal’s palace, the young princess was looking out of the window, and insisted on going herself to try them on. She hesitated to show her right hand; and the spy knew that she was guilty, so he seized her hand, and sunk into the ground with her. He delivered her over to the servants of the Sea of Emerald, who would have beaten her, but the Jinn surrounded her, and prevented them. Then the King of the Sea of Emerald ordered her to be taken, bound into the bath, saying that he would follow in the form of a serpent, and devour her. But she recognised him by his green eyes, when he became a man, ordered her to be restored to her father, and afterwards married her. He gave forty camel loads of emeralds and jacinths as her dowry, and always visited her by night in the form of a winged serpent, entering and leaving by the window.</p>
			<h4 class="c032">VI. <i><span xml:lang="fr">Histoire de la fille vertueuse.</span></i></h4>
			<p class="c027">A merchant and his wife set out to the Hejaz with their son, leaving their daughter to keep house, and commending her to the protection of the Kazi. The Kazi fell in love with the girl, but as she would not admit him, he employed an old woman to entice her to the bath; but the girl threw soap in his eyes, pushed him down and broke his head, and escaped to her own house, carrying off his clothes. When the Kazi was well enough to get about again he found that she had had the door of her house walled up until the return of her friends, so he wrote a slanderous letter to her father, who sent her brother to kill her, and bring him a bottle of her blood. But her brother, although he thought the walling up of the door was a mere pretence, could not find it in his heart to kill her, but abandoned her in the desert, and filled the bottle with gazelle-blood. When the young girl awoke, she wandered to a spring, and climbed into a tree where a prince who was passing saw her, carried her home, and married her. She had two sons and a daughter, but one of their playmates refused to play with them because they had no maternal uncle. The king then ordered the wazir to escort the princess and her three children to her father’s village for a month; but on the road, the wazir made love to her, and she allowed him to kill her three children in succession to save her honour. At last, he became so pressing that she pretended to consent, but asked to quit the tent for a moment, with a cord attached to her hand to prevent her escape. But she untied the cord, fastened it to a tree, and fled. As they could not find the princess, the wazir advised the soldiers to tell the king that a Ghúleh had devoured the children, and fled into the desert. The princess changed clothes with a shepherd boy, went to a town, and took a situation in a café. When the wazir returned to the king, and delivered his report, the king proposed that they should disguise themselves, and set out in search of the princess and her children; and the wazir could not refuse. Meantime, the brother of the princess had admitted to her father that he had not slain her, and they also set out in search of her, taking the Kazi with them. They all met at the café, where she recognised them, and offered to tell them a story. She related her own, and was restored to her friends. They seized the Kazi and the wazir, and sent for the old woman, when they burned them all three, and scattered their ashes in the air.</p>
			<div>
				<h4 class="c032">VII. <i><span xml:lang="fr">Histoire du prince qui apprit un métier.</span></i></h4>
			</div>
			<p class="c027">A prince named Mohammed l’Avisé went to seek a wife, and fell in love with the daughter of a leek-grower. She would not accept him unless he learned a trade, so he learned the trade of a silk weaver, who taught him in five minutes; and he worked a handkerchief with the palace of his father embroidered upon it. Two years afterwards, the prince and the wazir took a walk, when they found a Maghrabi seated at the gate of the town, who invited them to take coffee. But he was a prisoner (or rather, a murderer) who imprisoned them behind seven doors; and after three days he cooked the wazir, and was going to cook the prince, but he persuaded him to take his handkerchief to market, where it was recognised, and the prince released from his peril. Two years later the king died, and the prince succeeded to the throne. The latter had a son and daughter, but he died when the boy was six and the girl eight, warning the boy not to marry until the girl was married, lest his wife should ill-use her. After two years, the sister said, “Brother, if I show you the treasures of your father and mother, what will you do?” He answered, “I will buy a slipper for you and a slipper for me, and we will play with them among the stones.” “No,” said she, “you are still too little,” and waited a year before she asked him again. This time he answered, “I will buy a tambourine for you, and a flute for myself, and we will play in the street.” She waited two years more, and this time he answered, “We will use them to repair the water-wheels and my father’s palaces, and we will sow and reap.” “Now you are big,” said she, and gave him the treasures, which he used to erect buildings in his father’s country. Soon afterwards, an old woman persuaded the youth to marry her daughter; but she herself went into the mountains, collected eggs of the bird Oumbar, which make virgins pregnant if they eat them, and gave them to the sister. The old woman reported the result to the king, who visited his sister to satisfy himself of the truth of the matter, and then left her, but sent her food by a slave. When the sister’s time came, four angels descended from heaven, and took her daughter, bringing the child to her mother to be nursed. The mother died of grief, and the angels washed and shrouded her and wept over her; and when the king heard it, he opened the door, and the angels flew away to heaven with the child. The king ordered a tomb to be built in the palace for his sister, and was so much grieved at her death that he went on pilgrimage. When he had been gone some time, and the time of his return approached, the old woman opened the sister’s tomb, intending to throw her body to the dogs to devour, and to put the carcase of a sheep in its place. The angels put the child in the tomb, and she reproached and threatened the old woman; who, however, seized upon her and dyed her black, pretending that she was a little black slave whom she had bought. When the king returned, he pitied her, and called her to sit by him, but she asked for a candle and candlestick to hold in her hand before all the company. Then she told her mother’s story, saying to the candle at every word, “Gutter for kings; this is my uncle, the chief of kings.” Then the candle threw mahboubs on her uncle’s knees. When the story was ended the king ordered proclamation to be made, “Let whosoever loves the Prophet and the Elect, bring wood and fire.” The people obeyed, and the old woman and her daughter were burned.</p>
			<div>
				<h4 class="c032">VIII. <i><span xml:lang="fr">Histoire du Prince Amoureux.</span></i></h4>
			</div>
			<p class="c027">A woman prayed to God to give her a daughter, even if she should die of the smell of flax. When the girl was ten years old, the king’s son passed through the street, saw her at the window, and fell in love with her. An old woman discovered that he loved Sittoukan, the daughter of a merchant, and promised to obtain her. She contrived to set her to spin flax, when a splinter ran under her nail, and she fainted. The old woman persuaded her father and mother to build a palace in the midst of the river, and to lay her there on a bed. Thither she took the prince, who turned the body about, saw the splinter, drew it out, and the girl awoke. He remained with her forty days, when he went down to the door, where he found the wazir waiting, and they entered the garden. There they found roses and jasmines, and the prince said, “The jasmines are as white as Sittoukan, and the roses are like her cheeks; if you did not approve, I would still remain with her, were it only for three days.” He went up again for three days, and when he next visited the wazir, they saw a carob-tree, and the prince said, “Remember wazir, the carob-tree is like the eyebrows of Sittoukan, and if you would not let me, I would still remain with her, were it only for three days.” Three days later, they saw a fountain, when the prince observed that it was like the form of Sittoukan, and he returned. But this time, she was curious to know why he always went and returned, and he found her watching behind the door, so he spat on her saying, “If you did not love men, you would not hide behind doors”; and he left her. She wandered into the garden in her grief, where she found the ring of empire, which she rubbed, and the ring said, “At your orders, what do you ask for?” She asked for increased beauty, and a palace beside that of the prince. The prince fell in love with her, and sent his mother to propose for her hand. The mother took two pieces of royal brocade as a present, which the young lady ordered a slave in her hearing to cut up for dusters. Then the mother brought her an emerald collar worth four thousand dinars, when she ordered to be threshed, and thrown to the pigeons. The old lady acknowledged herself beaten, and asked Sittoukan if she wished to marry or not. The latter demanded that the prince should be wrapped in seven shrouds, and carried to the palace which she indicated, as if he were dead. Then she went and took off the shrouds one after another, and when she came to the seventh, she spat on him, saying, “If you did not love women, you would not be wrapped in seven shrouds.” Then he said, “Is it you?” and he bit his finger till he bit it off, and they remained together.</p>
			<h4 class="c032">IX. <i><span xml:lang="fr">Histoire du musicien ambulant et de son fils.</span></i></h4>
			<p class="c027">This travelling musician was so poor that when his wife was confined, he went out to beg for their immediate necessities, and found a hen lying on the ground with an egg under her. He met a Jew to whom he sold the egg for twenty mabboubs. The hen laid an egg every day, which the Jew bought for twenty mabboubs, and the musician became rich and opened a merchant’s shop. When his son was grown, he built a school for him at his own expense, where poor children were taught to read. Then the musician set out on pilgrimage, charging his wife not to let the Jew trick her out of the hen. A fortnight afterwards, the Jew called, and persuaded the woman to sell him the hen for a casket of silver. He ordered her to cook it, but told her that if anybody else ate a piece, he would rip him up. The musician’s son came in, while the fowl was cooking, and as his mother would not give him any, he seized the gizzard, and ate it, when one of the slaves warned him to fly before the arrival of the Jew. The Jew pursued the boy, and would have killed him, but the latter took him up with one hand, and dashed him to pieces on the ground. The musician’s son continued his journey, and arrived at a town where thirty-nine heads of suitors who had failed to conquer the princess in wrestling, were suspended at the gate of the palace. On the first day the youth wrestled with the princess for two hours without either being able to overcome the other; but during the night the king ordered the doctors to drug the successful suitor, and to steal the talisman. Next morning when the youth awoke, he perceived his weakness, and fled. Presently he met three men quarrelling over a flying carpet, a food-producing cup, and a money mill. He threw a stone for them to run after, and transported himself to Mount Kaf, where he made trial of the other talismans. Then he returned to the palace, called to the princess to come down to wrestle with him, and as soon as she stepped on the carpet, carried her away to Mount Kaf, when she promised to restore the gizzard, and to marry him. She deserted him, and he found two date-trees, one bearing red and the other yellow dates. On eating a yellow date, a horn grew from his head<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8189" id="noteref-8189" epub:type="noteref">8189</a> and twisted round the two date-trees. A red date removed it. He filled his pockets, and travelled night and day for two months.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8190" id="noteref-8190" epub:type="noteref">8190</a> He cried dates out of season, and the princess bought sixteen yellow ones, and ate them all; and eight [sixteen?] horns grew from her head, four to each wall. They could not be sawn off, and the king offered his daughter to whoever could remove them. When the musician’s son married the princess, and became wazir, he said to his bride, “Where is my carpet, &amp;c.” She replied, “Is it you?” “Yes,” said he, “Is my trick or yours the best?” She admitted that she was beaten, and they lived together in harmony.</p>
			<h4 class="c032">X. <i><span xml:lang="fr">Histoire du rossignol chanteur.</span></i></h4>
			<p class="c027">(This story is briefly given by Mr. W. A. Clouston, Suppl. Nights iii., p. 123; but I give here a fuller abstract.)</p>
			<p>Three brothers built a palace for their mother and sister after their father’s death. The sister loved someone of whom the brothers disapproved. An old woman advised the sister to send her brothers for the singing nightingale. The two eldest would not wait till the bird was asleep, but while they were trying to shut his cage, he dusted sand over them with his claws, and sunk them to the seventh earth. The beads and the ring gave warning of their deaths at home; but the third, who left a rose with his mother, to fade if he died, captured the bird, and received sand from under the cage. When he scattered it on the ground, more than a thousand men rose up, some negroes and some Turks. The brothers were not among them, so the youngest was told to scatter white sand, when 500 more people emerged, including the brothers. Afterwards the eldest brother was sitting in his ship when a Maghrebi told him to clean his turban; which his mother interpreted to mean that his sister had misconducted herself, and he should kill her. He refused, and fled with her to the desert. Hearing voices, he entered a cave where thirty-nine robbers were dividing rations; and he contrived to appropriate a share, and then to return it when missed; but as he was detected, he gave himself out as a fellow-robber, engaged himself to them, and watching his opportunity, slew them. Afterwards he brought his sister two young lions. She found a wounded negro in the cave, whom she nursed, and after having had two children by him, plotted against her brother. She pretended to be ill, and sent him to find the grapes of Paradise. He met a Ghúleh who gave him a ball which directed him to Paradise, and he returned safely. Then his sister sent him for the Water of Life, when the two young lions followed him, and he could not drive them back. After travelling for a year the brother reached the Sea of the Water of Life, and while resting under a tree, heard two pigeons telling each other that the king’s daughter was ill, and every doctor who failed to restore her was put to death, and she could only be cured by the Water of Life. “Mohammed l’Avisé” filled two bottles and a jar with the water, cured the princess with the water in the jar, married her, and after forty days, gave her one bottle, and set out to visit his family. At the sister’s instigation, the negro slew Mohammed, cut him to pieces, and put the remains into a sack, which they loaded on the ass. Then the lions drove the ass to the wife of Mohammed, who restored his life with the water which he had left with her. Mohammed then shut up the lions, dressed himself as a negro, and went to visit his sister, taking with him some rings and mastic (ladin). His sister recognised his eyes; and while she and the negro were disputing, Mohammed slew the negro and the three [<i><span xml:lang="la">sic</span></i>] children, and buried his sister alive. He then returned to his wife, announced that his relations were dead, and asked for a hundred camels; and it took them a week to convey away the treasures of the robbers.</p>
			<h4 class="c032">XI. <i><span xml:lang="fr">Histoire d’Arab-Zandyq.</span></i></h4>
			<p class="c027">This story is translated by Mr. W. A. Clouston, Suppl. Nights, iii. pp. 619–624, and need not be repeated here.</p>
			<h4 class="c032">XII. <i><span xml:lang="fr">Histoire du prince et de son cheval.</span></i></h4>
			<p class="c027">A prince and foal were born at the same time, and some time afterwards the mother and the mare died. The king married again, and the new queen had an intrigue with a Jew. They plotted to poison the prince, but his horse wept and warned him. Then the queen pretended to be ill, and asked for the heart of the horse, but the prince fled to another kingdom, and bought clothes from a poor man, packing his own on his horse. Then he parted from the horse, who gave him a hair and a flint, telling him to light the hair whenever he needed him. The prince then went to a town, and engaged himself as under-gardener to the king. He was set to drive the ox which turned the water-wheel, but one day he called his horse, put on his own clothes, and galloped about the garden, where the youngest princess saw “Mohammed l’Avisé” from the window, and fell in love with him. He then returned to the water-wheel, and when the head-gardener returned and found the garden in disorder, he wanted to beat him; but the princess interfered and ordered the prince to receive a fowl and a cake of bread every day. The princess then persuaded her mother and sisters that it was time to be married, so the king ordered everybody to pass under the window of the seven princesses, each of whom threw down a handkerchief on the man of her choice. But the youngest would look at no one till at last they fetched the gardener’s boy, when the king was angry, and confined them in a room. The king fell ill with vexation, and the doctors ordered him to drink bear’s milk in the hide of a virgin<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8191" id="noteref-8191" epub:type="noteref">8191</a> bear. The king’s six sons-in-law were ordered to seek it, and Mohammed too set forth mounted on a lame mare, while the people jeered him. Presently he summoned his own horse, and ordered him to pitch a camp of which the beginning and the end could not be seen, and which should contain nothing but bears. When the six sons-in-law passed, they dismounted, and asked the attendants for what they required, but they referred them to their king. The latter offered them what they asked, but branded a ring and a circle on the back of each of the sons-in-law. However, he gave them only the milk and hide of old she-bears, while he himself took the milk of a virgin<a class="c011" href="#f446"><sup>[446]</sup></a> bear that had just cubbed for the first time, slaughtered it, put the milk into the skin, and then remounted his lame mare, saying to the horse, “God reward you.” He returned to town, and gave the milk to his wife who took it to her mother. Then the six sons-in-law brought the milk to the doctors, but when they looked at it, they said, “This is the milk of an old she-bear and is good for nothing.” Then they gave the king the other milk, and cured him, but he was much annoyed to hear who had brought it. Soon afterwards a war broke out, and the king pitched his camp outside the town in face of the enemy. Mohammed set out again on his lame mare, the people shouting after him, “Go back, sir, for the soldiers have been defeated.” Then he summoned his horse, put on his own clothes, and said to the horse, “Let your hair shoot forth fire.” Then he came before the king, saying, “I declare for you and your six sons-in-law.” He rushed into battle, smiting with his sword, while his horse shot forth fire. They slew a third of the enemy, and then disappeared, while the king lamented, “Ah, if my six sons-in-law had only done this!” After his exertions Mohammed was tired, and went home to sleep. Next day the same thing happened, but the king put his own ring on his finger. On the third day he slew the remaining third of his enemies, but his arm was wounded, and the king bound it up with his own handkerchief before he departed. The king gathered together the horses and the spoil, and returned to town, much vexed that his sons-in-law had done nothing. Then the youngest princess asked her mother to send for her father to look at the ring and the handkerchief, when he fell down and kissed the feet of Mohammed, who rose up giddy from sleep, but when he was asked his history, he answered, “I am a prince like yourself, and your six sons-in-law are mamelouks of my father. I beat them, and they took to flight, and through fear of my father, I set out in search of them. I came here and found that they were your sons-in-law, but I imposed silence on them. But as regards your daughter, she saw me in the garden, and recognised my real rank; here is your daughter, O king; she is still a virgin.” Then the wedding was celebrated with great pomp, and Mohammed remained with his father-in-law for some time, until he desired to return to his own country. On his arrival he found that his father had died, so he ascended the throne, and ordered his mother-in-law and the Jew to be burned.</p>
			<h4 class="c032"><cite><span xml:lang="fr">Carlo de Landberg, Básim le Forgeron et Haron Er-Rachid</span></cite>, 8vo., Leyden, 1888.</h4>
			<p class="c027">Text and translation of a modern Arabic story of an unfortunate smith and hashish-eater whom Harun encounters on one of his usual nocturnal rambles. Harun plays a succession of practical jokes on him, driving him out of his employment every day, and supping with him every night. At last he bastinadoes him, and throws him into prison, where a jinniyah takes pity on him, and confers unlimited power on him, which he enjoys for a week, and then dies, to the great grief of Harun.</p>
			<h3 class="c015">
				<em>ADDITIONAL NOTE TO VOL. V. pp. 442–444.</em>
			</h3>
			<p class="c027">Compare Boccaccio’s story of the Devil in Hell (Day iii. No. 10.)</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
