<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ailaho A'alam, a deprecatory formula, used because the writer is going to indulge in a series of what may possibly be untruths. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The "Sons of Sásán" are the famous Sassanides whose dynasty ended with the Arabian Conquest (<span class="fss">A.D.</span> 641). "Island" (Jazírah) in Arabic also means "Peninsula," and causes much confusion in geographical matters. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Shahryár not Shahriyar (Persian)="City-friend." The Bulak edition corrupts it to Shahrbáz (City-hawk), and the Breslau to Shahrbán or "Defender of the City," like Marz-ban=Warden of the Marshes. Shah Zamán (Persian)="King of the Age:" Galland prefers Shah Zenan, or "King of women," and the Bul. edit. changes it to Shah Rummán, "Pomegranate King." Al-Ajam denotes all regions not Arab (Gentiles opposed to Jews, Mlechchhas to Hindus, Tajiks to Turks, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>), and especially Persia; Ajami (a man of Ajam) being an equivalent of the <abbr title="Greek">Gr.</abbr> <span xml:lang="el">Βάρβαρος</span>. See <abbr title="Volume">Vol.</abbr> ii., p. 1 <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>.</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Galland writes "Vizier," a wretched frenchification of a mincing Turkish mispronunciation; Torrens, "Wuzeer" (Anglo-Indian and Gilchristian); Lane, "Wezeer" (Egyptian or rather Cairene); Payne, "Vizier," according to his system; Burckhardt (Proverbs), "Vizír;" and Mr. Keith-Falconer, "Vizir." The root is popularly supposed to be "wizr" (burden) and the meaning "Minister;" Wazír al-Wuzará being "Premier." In the Koran (<abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> xx., 30) Moses says, "Give me a Wazir of my family, Harun (Aaron) my brother." Sale, followed by the excellent version of the Rev. J. M. Rodwell, translates a "Counsellor," and explains by "One who has the chief administration of affairs under a prince." But both learned Koranists learnt their Orientalism in London, and, like such students generally, fail only upon the easiest points, familiar to all old dwellers in the East. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This three-days term (rest-day, drest-day and departure day) seems to be an instinct-made rule in hospitality. Among Moslems it is a Sunnat or practice of the Prophet. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em>, I am sick at heart. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Debauched women prefer negroes on account of the size of their parts. I measured one man in Somali-land who, when quiescent, numbered nearly six inches. This is a characteristic of the negro race and of African animals: <em><abbr title="exempli gratia">e.g.</abbr></em> the horse; whereas the pure Arab, man and beast, is below the average of Europe; one of the best proofs by the by, that the Egyptian is not an Asiatic, but a negro partially whitewashed. Moreover, these imposing parts do not increase proportionally during erection; consequently, the "deed of kind" takes a much longer time and adds greatly to the woman's enjoyment. In my time no honest Hindi Moslem would take his womenfolk to Zanzibar on account of the huge attractions and enormous temptations there and thereby offered to them. Upon the subject of Imsák=retention of semen and "prolongation of pleasure," I shall find it necessary to say more. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The very same words were lately spoken in England proving the eternal truth of The Nights which the ignorant call "downright lies." <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Arab's <em><span xml:lang="fr">Tue la!</span></em> <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Sayd wa kanas": the former usually applied to fishing; hence Sayda (Sidon)=fish-town. But noble Arabs (except the Caliph Al-Amin) do not fish; so here it means simply "sport," chasing, coursing, birding (oiseler), and so forth. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the Mac. Edit, the negro is called "Mas'úd"; here he utters a kind of war-cry and plays upon the name, Sa'ád, Sa'íd, Sa'úd, and Mas'ud, all being derived from one root, "Sa'ad"=auspiciousness, prosperity. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Arab singular (whence the French "<span xml:lang="fr">génie</span>"); <abbr title="feminine">fem.</abbr> Jinniyah; the Div and Rakshah of old Guebre-land and the "Rakshasa," or "Yaksha," of Hinduism. It would be interesting to trace the evident connection, by no means "accidental," of "Jinn" with the "Genius" who came to the Romans through the Asiatic Etruscans, and whose name I cannot derive from "gignomai" or "<span xml:lang="la">genitus</span>." He was unknown to the Greeks, who had the Daimon (<span xml:lang="el">δαίμον</span>), a family which separated, like the Jinn and the Genius, into two categories, the good (Agatho-dæmons) and the bad (Kako-dæmons). We know nothing concerning the status of the Jinn amongst the pre-Moslemitic or pagan Arabs: the Moslems made him a supernatural anthropoid being, created of subtile fire (Koran, <abbr title="chapters">chapts.</abbr> xv. 27; lv. 14), not of earth like man, propagating his kind, ruled by mighty kings, the last being Ján bin Ján, missionarised by Prophets and subject to death and Judgment. From the same root are "Junún"=madness (<em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em>, possession or obsession by the Jinn) and "Majnún"=a madman. According to R. Jeremiah bin Eliazar in Psalm xli. 5, Adam was excommunicated for one hundred and thirty years, during which he begat children in his own image (Gen. v. 3) and these were Mazikeen or Shedeem—Jinns. Further details anent the Jinn will presently occur. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab "Amsár" (cities): in Bul. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> "Amtár" (rains), as in Mac. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> So Mr. Payne (I., 5) translates:—</p>
					<div class="c016 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">And when she flashes forth the lightning of her glance, She maketh eyes to rain, like showers, with many a tear.</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>I would render it, "She makes whole cities shed tears;" and prefer it for a reason which will generally influence me—its superior exaggeration and impossibility. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Not "A-frit," pronounced Aye-frit, as our poets have it. This variety of the Jinn, who, as will be shown, are divided into two races like mankind, is generally, but not always, a malignant being, hostile and injurious to mankind (Koran xxvii. 39). <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em>, "I conjure thee by Allah;" the formula is technically called "Inshád." <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This introducing the name of Allah into an indecent tale is essentially Egyptian and Cairene. But see Boccacio ii. 6; and vii. 9. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>So in the Mac. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr>; in others "ninety." I prefer the greater number as exaggeration is a part of the humour. In the Hindu "Kathá Sárit Ságara" (Sea of the Streams of Story), the rings are one hundred and the catastrophe is more moral; the good youth Yashodhara rejects the wicked one's advances; she awakes the water-sprite, who is about to slay him, but the rings are brought as testimony and the improper young person's nose is duly cut off. (<abbr title="Chapter">Chapt.</abbr> lxiii.; p. 80, of the excellent translation by Prof. C. H. Tawney: for the Bibliotheca Indica: Calcutta, 1881.) The Kathá, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>, by Somadeva (century xi), is a poetical version of the prose compendium, the "Vrihat Kathá" (Great Story) by Gunadhya (<abbr title="centage">cent.</abbr> vi). <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Joseph of the Koran, very different from him of Genesis. We shall meet him often enough in The Nights. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Iblis," vulgarly written "Eblis," from a root meaning The Despairer, with a suspicious likeness to Diabolos; possibly from "Balas," a profligate. Some translate it The Calumniator, as Satan is the Hater. Iblis (who appears in the <abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> version of the N. Testament) succeeded another revolting angel Al-Haris; and his story of pride, refusing to worship Adam, is told four times in the Koran from the Talmud (Sanhedrim 29). He caused Adam and Eve to lose Paradise (ii. 34); he still betrays mankind (xxv. 31), and at the end of time he, with the other devils, will be "gathered together on their knees round Hell" (xix. 69). He has evidently had the worst of the game and we wonder, with Origen, Tillotson, Burns and many others, that he does not throw up the cards. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A similar tale is still told at Akká (St. John d'Acre) concerning the terrible "butcher"—Jazzár (Djezzar) Pasha. One can·hardly pity women who are fools enough to run such risks. According to Frizzi, Niccolò, Marquis of Este, after beheading Parisina, ordered all the faithless wives of Ferrara to be treated in like manner. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Shahrázád (Persian)=City-freer; in the older version Scheherazade (probably both from Shirzád=lion-born). "Dunyázád=World-freer. The Bres. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> corrupts the former to Sháhrzád or Sháhrazád; and the Mac. and Calc. to Shahrzád or Shehrzád. I have ventured to restore the name as it should be. Galland for the second prefers Dinarzade (?) and Richardson Dinazade (Dinázád=Religion-freer): here I have followed Lane and Payne; though in "First Footsteps" I was misled by Galland. See <abbr title="Volume">Vol.</abbr> ii. p. 1. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Probably she proposed to "Judith" the King. These learned and clever young ladies are very dangerous in the East. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Egypt, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>, the bull takes the place of the Western ox. The <abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> word is "Taur" (Thaur, Saur); in old Persian "Tora" and <abbr title="Latin">Lat.</abbr> "Taurus," a venerable remnant of the days before the "Semitic" and "Aryan" families of speech had split into two distinct growths. "Taur" ends in the Saxon "Steor" and the English "Steer." <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Abú Yakzán"=the Wakener; because the ass brays at dawn. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Tibn"; straw crushed under the sledge: the hay of Egypt, Arabia, Syria, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> The old country custom is to pull up the corn by handfuls from the roots, leaving the land perfectly bare: hence the "plucking up" of Hebrew Holy Writ. The object is to preserve every atom of "Tibn." <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Yá Aftah": Al-Aftah is an epithet of the bull, also of the chameleon. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Balid," a favourite Egyptianism often pleasantly confounded with "Wali" (a Santon); hence the latter comes to mean "an innocent," a "ninny." <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From the Calc. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr>, <abbr title="Volume">Vol.</abbr> I., p. 29. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Abu Yakzán" is hardly equivalent with "<span xml:lang="fr">Père l'Eveillé</span>." <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In <abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> the wa (<span xml:lang="ar">وَ</span>) is the sign of parenthesis. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the nearer East the light little plough is carried a-field by the bull or ass. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ocymum basilicum, the "royal herb," so much prized all over the East, especially in India, where, under the name of "Tulsi," it is a shrub sacred to the merry god Krishna. I found the verses in a <abbr title="Manuscript">MS.</abbr> copy of the Nights. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Sadaf," the Kauri, or cowrie, brought from the Maldive and Lakdive Archipelago. The Kámús describes this "Wada'" or Concha Veneris as "a white shell [whence to "shell out"] which is taken out of the sea, the fissure of which is white like that of the date-stone. It is hung about the neck to avert the evil eye." The pearl in <abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> is "Murwarid," hence evidently "Margarita" and Margaris (woman's name). <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Kat'a" (bit of leather): some read "Nat'a," a leather used by way of table-cloth, and forming a bag for victuals; but it is never made of bull's hide. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Older "Cadi," a judge in religious matters. The Shuhúd, or Assessors, are officers of the Mahkamah or Kazi's Court. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Of which more in a future page. He thus purified himself ceremonially before death. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is Christian rather than Moslem: a favourite Maltese curse is "Yahrak Kiddísak man rabba-k!"=burn the Saint who brought thee up! <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A popular Egyptian phrase: the dog and the cock speak like Fellahs. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> between the last sleep and dawn when they would rise to wash and pray. <a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Travellers tell of a peculiar knack of jerking the date-stone, which makes it strike with great force: I never saw this "Inwá" practised, but it reminds me of the water-splashing with one hand in the German baths. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em>, sorely against his will. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Shaykh"=an old man (primarily), an elder, a chief (of the tribe, guild, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>); and honourably addressed to any man. Comp. among the neo-Latins "Sieur," "Signore," "Señor," "Senhor," <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> from <abbr title="Latin">Lat.</abbr> "Senior," which gave our "Sire" and "Sir." Like many in Arabic the word has a host of different meanings and most of them will occur in the course of The Nights. Ibrahim (Abraham) was the first Shaykh or man who became grey. Seeing his hairs whiten he cried, "O Allah what is this?" and the answer came that it was a sign of dignified gravity. Hereupon he exclaimed, "O Lord increase this to me!" and so it happened till his locks waxed snowy white at the age of one hundred and fifty. He was the first who parted his hair, trimmed his mustachios, cleaned his teeth with the Miswák (tooth-stick), pared his nails, shaved his pecten, snuffed up water, used ablution after stool and wore a shirt (Tabari). <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The word is mostly plural=Jinnís: it is also singular=a demon; and Ján bin Ján has been noticed. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With us moderns "liver" suggests nothing but malady: in Arabic and Persian as in the classic literature of Europe it is the seat of passion, the heart being that of affection. Of this more presently. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Originally in Al-Islam the concubine (Surriyat, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>) was a captive taken in war and the Koran says nothing about buying slave-girls. But if the captives were true believers the Moslem was ordered to marry not to keep them. In modern days concubinage has become an extensive subject. Practically the disadvantage is that the slave-girls, knowing themselves to be the master's property, consider him bound to sleep with them; which is by no means the mistress's view. Some wives, however, when old and childless, insist, after the fashion of Sarah, upon the husband taking a young concubine and treat her like a daughter—which is rare. The Nights abound in tales of concubines, but these are chiefly owned by the Caliphs and high officials who did much as they pleased. The only redeeming point in the system is that it obviated the necessity of prostitution which is, perhaps, the greatest evil known to modern society. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-46" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Al-Kahánah"=the craft of a "Káhin" (<abbr title="Hebrew">Heb.</abbr> Cohen) a diviner, soothsayer, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-46" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-47" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Id al-kabír"=The Great Festival; the Turkish Bayrám and Indian Bakar-eed (Kine-fête), the pilgrimage-time, also termed "Festival of the Kurbán" (sacrifice) because victims are slain; Al-Zuha (of Undurn or forenoon), Al-Azhá (of serene night) and Al-Nahr (of throat-cutting). For full details I must refer readers to my "Personal Narrative of a Pilgrimage to El-Medinah and Meccah" (3 <abbr title="volumes">vols.</abbr> 8vo. London, Longmans, 1855). I shall have often to refer to it. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-47" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-48" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Kalám al-mubáh," <em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em>, that allowed or permitted to her by the King, her husband. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-48" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-49" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Moslem Kings are expected, like the old Guebre Monarchs, to hold "Darbar" (<em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em>, give public audience) at least twice a day, morning and evening. Neglect of this practice caused the ruin of the Caliphate and of the Persian and Moghul Empires: the great lords were left uncontrolled and the lieges revolted to obtain justice. The Guebre Kings had two levée places, the Rozistan (day station) and the Shabistan (night-station—istán or stán being a nominal form of istádan, to stand, as Hindo-stán). Moreover one day in the week the sovereign acted as "Mufti" or Supreme Judge. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-49" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-50" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Al-Bashárah," the gift everywhere claimed in the East and in Boccaccio's Italy by one who brings good news. Those who do the reverse expose themselves to a sound strappado. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-50" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-51" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A euphemistic formula, to avoid mentioning unpleasant matters. I shall note these for the benefit of students who would honestly prepare for the public service in Moslem lands. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-51" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-52" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Dinár," from the Latin <span xml:lang="la">denarius</span> (a silver coin worth ten ounces of brass) through the Greek <span xml:lang="el">δηνάριον</span>: it is a Koranic word (<abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> iii.) though its Arab equivalent is "Miskál." It also occurs in the Kathá before quoted, clearly showing the derivation. In the "Book of Kalilah and Dimnah" it is represented by the Daric or Persian Dinár, <span xml:lang="el">δαρεικός</span>, from Dárá=a King (whence Darius). The Dinar, sequin or ducat, contained at different times from 10 and 12 (Abu Hanifah's day) to 20 and even 25 dirhams or drachmas; and, as a weight, represented a drachma and a half. Its value greatly varied, but we may assume it here at nine shillings or ten francs to half a sovereign. For an elaborate article on the Dinar see Yule's "Cathay and the Way Thither" (ii., pp. 439-443). <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-52" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-53" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The formula used in refusing alms to an "asker" or in rejecting an insufficient offer: "Allah will open to thee!" (some door of gain—not mine)! Another favourite ejaculation is "Allah Karim" (which Turks pronounce "Kyereem")=Allah is All-beneficent: meaning Ask Him, not me. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-53" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-54" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The public bath. London knows the word through "The Hummums." <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-55" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Dirham" (<abbr title="Plural">Plur.</abbr> diráhim, also used in the sense of money, "siller"), the <abbr title="Greek">Gr.</abbr> <span xml:lang="el">δραχμή</span> and the <span xml:lang="la">drachuma</span> of Plautus (Trin. 2, 4, 23). The word occurs in the Panchatantra also showing the derivation; and in the Syriac Kalilah wa Dimnah it is "Zúz." This silver piece was=6 obols (9¾d.) and as a weight=66½ grains. The Dirham of The Nights was worth six "Dánik," each of these being a fraction over a penny. The modern Greek Drachma is=one franc. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-55" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-56" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Arabic the speaker always puts himself first, even if he address the King, without intending incivility. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-56" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-57" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A she-Ifrit, not necessarily an evil spirit. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-57" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-58" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Kullah" (in Egypt pron. "gulleh"), the wide-mouthed jug, called in the Hijaz "baradiyah;" "daurak" being the narrow. They are used either for water or sherbet and, being made of porous clay, "sweat," and keep the contents cool; hence all old Anglo-Egyptians drink from them, not from bottles. Sometimes they are perfumed with smoke of incense, mastich or Kafal (Amyris Kafal). For their graceful shapes See Lane's "Account of the Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians" (<abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> v). I quote, here and elsewhere, from the fifth edition, London, Murray, 1860. <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-58" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-59" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"And what is?" <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> A popular way of expressing great difference. So in India:—"Where is Rajah Bhoj (the great King) and where is Gangá the oilman?" <a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-59" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-60" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here, as in other places, I have not preserved the monorhyme, but have ended like the English sonnet with a couplet; as a rule the last two lines contain a "Husn makta'" or climax. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-60" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-61" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lit. "he began to say (or speak) poetry," such improvising being still common amongst the Badawin as I shall afterwards note. And although Mohammed severely censured profane poets, who "rove as bereft of their senses through every valley" and were directly inspired by devils (Koran xxvi.), it is not a little curious to note that he himself spoke in "Rajaz" (which see) and that the four first Caliphs all "spoke poetry." In early ages the verse would not be written, if written at all, till after the maker's death. I translate "inshád" by "versifying" or "repeating" or "reciting," leaving it doubtful if the composition be or be not original. In places, however, it is clearly improvised and then as a rule it is model doggrel. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-61" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-62" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Allahumma"=Yá Allah (O Allah) but with emphasis; the Fath being a substitute for the voc. part. Some connect it with the <abbr title="Hebrew">Heb.</abbr> "Alihím," but that fancy is not <abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> In Al-Hariri and the rhetoricians it sometimes means to be sure; of course; unless indeed; unless possibly=Greek <span xml:lang="el">νὴ δἰα</span>. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-62" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-63" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Probably in consequence of a vow. These superstitious practices, which have many a parallel amongst ourselves, are not confined to the lower orders in the East. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-63" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-64" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em>, saying "Bismillah!" the pious ejaculation which should precede every act. In Boccaccio (viii., 9) it is "remembering Iddio e' Santí." <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-64" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-65" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> Nahás asfar=brass, opposed to "Nahás" and "Nahás ahmar,"=copper. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-65" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-66" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This alludes to the legend of Sakhr al-Jinni, a famous fiend cast by Solomon David-son into Lake Tiberias whose storms make it a suitable place. Hence the "Bottle imp," a world-wide fiction of folk-lore: we shall find it in the "Book of Sindibad," and I need hardly remind the reader of Le Sage's "<span xml:lang="fr">Diable Boiteux</span>," borrowed from "<span xml:lang="es">El Diablo Cojuelo</span>," the Spanish novel by Luiz Velez de Guevara. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-66" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-67" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Márid (lit. "contumacious" from the <abbr title="Hebrew">Heb.</abbr> root Marad to rebel, whence "Nimrod" in late Semitic) is one of the tribes of the Jinn, generally but not always hostile to man. His female is "Máridah." <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-67" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-68" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As Solomon began to reign (according to vulgar chronometry) in B.C. 1015, the text would place the tale circ. A.D. 785,=A.H. 169. But we can lay no stress on this date which may be merely fanciful. Professor Tawney very justly compares this Moslem Solomon with the Hindu King, Vikramáditya, who ruled over the seven divisions of the world and who had as many devils to serve him as he wanted. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-68" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-69" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Yá Ba'íd" a euphemism here adopted to prevent using grossly abusive language. Others will occur in the course of these pages. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-69" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-70" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> about to fly out; "My heart is in my mouth." The Fisherman speaks with the dry humour of a Fellah. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-70" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-71" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Sulayman," when going out to ease himself, entrusted his seal-ring upon which his kingdom depended to a concubine "Amínah" (the "Faithful"), when Sakhr, transformed to the King's likeness, came in and took it. The prophet was reduced to beggary, but after forty days the demon fled throwing into the sea the ring which was swallowed by a fish and eventually returned to Sulayman. This Talmudic fable is hinted at in the Koran (<abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> xxxviii.), and commentators have extensively embroidered it. Asaf, son of Barkhiya, was Wazir to Sulayman and is supposed to be the "one with whom was the knowledge of the Scriptures" (Koran, <abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> xxxvii.), <em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> who knew the Ineffable Name of Allah. See the manifest descendant of the Talmudic-Koranic fiction in the "Tale of the Emperor Jovinian" (<abbr title="Number">No.</abbr> lix.) of the Gesta Romanorum, the most popular book of mediæval Europe composed in England (or Germany) about the end of the thirteenth century. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-71" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-72" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Kumkum," a gourd-shaped bottle, of metal, china or glass, still used for sprinkling scents. Lane gives an illustration (<abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> viii., Mod. Egypt.). <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-72" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-73" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> meaning "the Mother of Amir," a nickname for the hyena, which bites the hand that feeds it. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-73" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-74" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The intellect of man is stronger than that of the Jinni; the Ifrit, however, enters the jar because he has been adjured by the Most Great Name and not from mere stupidity. The seal-ring of Solomon according to the Rabbis contained a chased stone which told him everything he wanted to know. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-74" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-75" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Mesmerist will notice this shudder which is familiar to him as preceding the "magnetic" trance. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-75" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-76" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Bahr" which means a sea, a large river, a sheet of water, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>, lit. water cut or trenched in the earth. Bahri in Egypt means Northern; so Yamm (Sea, Mediterranean) in Hebrew is West. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-76" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-77" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the Bul. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> "Ruyán," evidently a clerical error. The name is fanciful not significant. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-77" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-78" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The geography is ultra-Shakspearean. "Fars" (whence "Persia") is the central Province of the grand old Empire now a mere wreck; "Rúm" (which I write Roum, in order to avoid Jamaica) is the neo-Roman or Byzantine Empire; while "Yunan" is the classical Arab term for Greece (Ionia) which unlearned Moslems believe to be now under water. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-78" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-79" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Sun greets Mohammed every morning even as it dances on Easter-Day for Christendom. <span xml:lang="la">Risum teneatis?</span> <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-79" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-80" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Nadím," a term often occurring. It denotes one who was intimate enough to drink with the Caliph, a very high honour and a dangerous. The last who sat with "Nudamá" was Al-Razi bi'llah A.H. 329=940. See Al-Siyuti's famous "History of the Caliphs" translated and admirably annotated by Major H. S. Jarrett, for the Bibliotheca Indica, Calcutta, 1880. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-80" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-81" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> Maydán (from Persian); Lane generally translates it "horse-course," and Payne "tilting-yard." It is both and something more; an open space, in or near the city, used for reviewing troops, races, playing the Jeríd (cane-spear) and other sports and exercises: thus Al-Maydan=<abbr title="Greek">Gr.</abbr> hippodrome. The game here alluded to is our "polo," or hockey on horseback, a favourite with the Persian Kings, as all old illustrations of the Shahnamah show. Maydan is also a natural plain for which copious Arabic has many terms; Fayhah or Sath (a plain generally), Khabt (a low lying plain), Bat'há (a low sandy flat), Mahattah (a plain fit for halting) and so forth. (Pilgrimage iii., 11.) <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-81" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-82" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For details concerning the "Ghusl" see Night xliv. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-82" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-83" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A popular idiom and highly expressive, contrasting the upright bearing of the self-satisfied man with the slouch of the miserable and the skirt-trailing of the woman in grief. I do not see the necessity of such Latinisms as "dilated" or "expanded." <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-83" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-84" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>All these highest signs of favour foreshow, in Eastern tales and in Eastern life, an approaching downfall of the heaviest; they are so great that they arouse general jealousy. Many of us have seen this at native courts. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-84" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-85" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This phrase is contained in the word "ihdák"=encompassing, as the conjunctiva does the pupil. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-85" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-86" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I have noted this formula, which is used even in conversation when about to relate some great unfact. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-86" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-87" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>We are obliged to English the word by "valley," which is about as correct as the "brook Kedron," applied to the grisliest of ravines. The Wady (in old Coptic wah, oah, whence "Oasis") is the bed of a watercourse which flows only after rains. I have rendered it by "Fiumara" (Pilgrimage i., 5, and ii., 196, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>), an Italian or rather a Sicilian word which exactly describes the "wady." <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-87" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-88" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I have described this scene which Mr. T. Wolf illustrated by an excellent lithograph in "Falconry, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>" (London, Van Voorst, <span class="fss">MDCCCLII.</span>). <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-88" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-89" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Kaylúlah," midday sleep; called siesta from the sixth canonical hour. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-89" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-90" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This parrot-story is world-wide in folk-lore and the belief in metempsychosis, which prevails more or less over all the East, there lends it probability. The "Book of Sindibad" (see Night dlxxix. and "The Academy," Sept. 20, 1884, No. 646) converts it into the "Story of the Confectioner, his Wife and the Parrot;" and it is the base of the Hindostani text-book, "Tota-Kaháni" (Parrot-chat), an abridgement of the Tutinámah (Parrot-book) of Nakhshabi (circ. A.D. 1300), a congener of the Sanskrit "Suka Saptati," or Seventy Parrot-stories. The tale is not in the Bul. or Mac. <abbr title="Editions">Edit.</abbr> but occurs in the Bresl. (i., pp. 90, 91) much mutilated; and better in the Calc. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> I cannot here refrain from noticing how vilely the twelve <abbr title="volumes">vols.</abbr> of the Breslau <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> have been edited; even a table of contents being absent from the first four volumes. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-90" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-91" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The young "Turk" is probably a late addition, as it does not appear in many of the <abbr title="Manuscripts">MSS.</abbr>, <em><abbr title="exempli gratia">e.g.</abbr></em> the Bresl. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> The wife usually spreads a cloth over the cage; this in the Turkish translation becomes a piece of leather. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-91" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-92" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Hebrew-Syrian month July used to express the height of summer. As Herodotus tells us (ii. 4) the Egyptians claimed to be the discoverers of the solar year and the portioners of its course into twelve parts. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-92" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-93" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This proceeding is thoroughly characteristic of the servile class; they conscientiously conceal everything from the master till he finds a clew; after which they tell him everything and something more. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-93" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-94" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Until late years, merchants and shopkeepers in the nearer East all carried swords, and held it a disgrace to leave the house unarmed. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-94" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-95" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Bresl. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> absurdly has Jazírah (an island). <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-95" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-96" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Ghúlah (<abbr title="feminine">fem.</abbr> of Ghúl) is the <abbr title="Hebrew">Heb.</abbr> Lilith or Lilis; the classical Lamia; the Hindu Yogini and Dakini; the Chaldean Utug and Gigim (desert-demons) as opposed to the Mas (hill-demon) and Telal (who steal into towns); the Ogress of our tales and the Bala yaga (Granny-witch) of Russian folk-lore. Etymologically "Ghul" is a calamity, a panic fear; and the monster is evidently the embodied horror of the grave and the grave-yard. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-96" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-97" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Shább" (<abbr title="Latin">Lat.</abbr> <span xml:lang="la">juvenis</span>) between puberty and forty or according to some fifty; when the patient becomes a "Rajul ikhtiyár" (man of free will) politely termed, and then a Shaykh or Shaybah (grey-beard, oldster). <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-97" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-98" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some proverbial name now forgotten. Torrens (p. 48) translates it "the giglot" (Fortune?) but "cannot discover the drift." <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-98" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-99" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Ihtizáz," that natural and instinctive movement caused by good news suddenly given, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-99" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-100" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab "Kohl," in India, Surmah, not a "collyrium," but powdered antimony for the eyelids. That sold in the bazars is not the real grey ore of antimony but a galena or sulphuret of lead. Its use arose as follows. When Allah showed Himself to Moses on Sinai through an opening the size of a needle, the Prophet fainted and the Mount took fire: thereupon Allah said, "Henceforth shalt thou and thy seed grind the earth of this mountain and apply it to your eyes!" The powder is kept in an étui called Makhalah and applied with a thick blunt needle to the inside of the eyelid, drawing it along the rim; hence etui and probe denote the sexual <em><span xml:lang="la">rem in re</span></em> and in cases of adultery the question will be asked, "Didst thou see the needle in the Kohl-pot?" Women mostly use a preparation of soot or lamp-black (Hind. Kajala, Kajjal) whose colour is easily distinguished from that of Kohl. The latter word, with the article (Al-Kohl) is the origin of our "alcohol;" though even M. Littré fails to show how "fine powder" became "spirits of wine." I found this powder (wherewith Jezebel "painted" her eyes) a great preservative from ophthalmia in desert-travelling: the use in India was universal, but now European example is gradually abolishing it. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-100" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-101" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The tale of these two women is now forgotten. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-101" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Atadakhkhal". When danger threatens it is customary to seize a man's skirt and cry "Dakhíl-ak!" (=under thy protection). Among noble tribes the Badawi thus invoked will defend the stranger with his life. Foreigners have brought themselves into contempt by thus applying to women or to mere youths. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-102" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-103" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The formula of quoting from the Koran. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-103" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-104" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lit. "Allah not desolate me" (by thine absence). This is still a popular phrase—Lá tawáhishná=Do not make me desolate, <em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> by staying away too long; and friends meeting after a term of days exclaim "Auhashtani!"=thou hast made me desolate, <em><span xml:lang="fr">Je suis désolé</span></em>. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-104" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-105" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Charming simplicity of manners when the Prime Minister carries the fish (shade of Vattel!) to the cookmaid. The "Gesta Romanorum" is nowhere more naive. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-105" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-106" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Kahílat al-taraf"=lit. eyelids lined with Kohl; and figuratively "with black lashes and languorous look." This is a phrase which frequently occurs in The Nights and which, as will appear, applies to the "lower animals" as well as to men. Moslems In Central Africa apply Kohl not to the thickness of the eyelid but upon both outer lids, fixing it with some greasy substance. The peculiar Egyptian (and Syrian) eye with its thick fringes of jet-black lashes, looking like lines of black drawn with soot, easily suggests the simile. In England I have seen the same appearance amongst miners fresh from the colliery. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-106" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-107" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Of course applying to her own case. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-107" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-108" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Prehistoric Arabs who measured from 60 to 100 cubits high: Koran, <abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> xxvi., <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> They will often be mentioned in The Nights. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-108" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-109" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Dastúr" (from Persian)=leave, permission. The word has two meanings (see Burckhardt, <abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> Prov. No. 609) and is much used, <em><abbr title="exempli gratia">e.g.</abbr></em> before walking up stairs or entering a room where strange women might be met. So "Tarík"=Clear the way (Pilgrimage, iii., 319). The old Persian occupation of Egypt, not to speak of the Persian-speaking Circassians and other rulers has left many such traces in popular language. One of them is that horror of travellers—"Bakhshísh" pron. bakh-sheesh and shortened to shísh from the <abbr title="Persian">Pers.</abbr> "baksheesh." Our "Christmas <em>box</em>" has been most unnecessarily derived from the same, despite our reading:—</p>
					<div class="c016 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">Gladly the boy, with Christmas box in hand.</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>And, as will be seen, Persians have bequeathed to the outer world worse things than bad language, <em><abbr title="exempli gratia">e.g.</abbr></em> heresy and sodomy. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-109" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-110" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He speaks of his wife, but euphemistically in the masculine. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-110" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-111" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A popular saying throughout Al-Islam. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-111" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-112" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Fata": lit=a youth; a generous man, one of noble mind (as youth-tide should be). It corresponds with the <abbr title="Latin">Lat.</abbr> "<span xml:lang="la">vir</span>," and has much the meaning of the Ital. "<span xml:lang="it">Giovane</span>," the Germ. "<span xml:lang="de">Junker</span>" and our "gentleman." <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-112" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-113" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From the Bul. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-113" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-114" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The vagueness of his statement is euphemistic. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-114" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-115" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This readiness of shedding tears contrasts strongly with the external stoicism of modern civilization; but it is true to Arab character; and Easterns, like the heroes of Homer and Italians of Boccaccio, are not ashamed of what we look upon as the result of feminine hysteria—"a good cry." <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-115" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-116" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The formula (constantly used by Moslems) here denotes displeasure, doubt how to act and so forth. Pronounce, "Lá haula wa lá kuwwata illá bi 'lláhi 'l-Aliyyi 'l-Azim." As a rule mistakes are marvellous: Mandeville (<abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> xii.) for "Lá iláha illa 'lláhu wa Muhammadun Rasúlu 'llah" writes "La ellec sila, Machomete rores alla." The former (lá haula, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>), on account of the four peculiar Arabic letters, is everywhere pronounced differently; and the exclamation is called "Haulak" or "Haukal." <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-116" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-117" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An Arab holds that he has a right to marry his first cousin, the daughter of his father's brother, and if any win her from him a death and a blood-feud may result. It was the same in a modified form amongst the Jews and in both races the consanguineous marriage was not attended by the evil results (idiotcy, congenital deafness, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>) observed in mixed races like the English and the Anglo-American. When a Badawi speaks of "the daughter of my uncle" he means wife; and the former is the dearer title, as a wife can be divorced, but blood is thicker than water. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-117" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-118" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Kahbah;" the coarsest possible term. Hence the unhappy "Cava" of Don Roderick the Goth, which simply means The Whore. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-118" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-119" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Arab "Banj" and Hindú "Bhang" (which I use as most familiar) both derive from the old Coptic "Nibanj" meaning a preparation of hemp (<em>Cannabis sativa</em> seu <em>Indica</em>); and here it is easy to recognise the Homeric "Nepenthe." Al-Kazwini explains the term by "garden hemp" (Kinnab bostáni or Sháhdánaj). On the other hand not a few apply the word to the henbane (<em>hyoscyamus niger</em>) so much used in mediæval Europe. The Kámús evidently means henbane distinguishing it from "Hashish al haráfísh"=rascals' grass, <em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> the herb Pantagruelion. The "Alfáz Adwiya" (French translation) explains "Tabannuj" by "<span xml:lang="fr">Endormir quelqu'un en lui faisant avaler de la jusquiame</span>." In modern parlance Tabannuj is=our anæsthetic administered before an operation, a deadener of pain like myrrh and a number of other drugs. For this purpose hemp is always used (at least I never heard of henbane); and various preparations of the drug are sold at an especial bazar in Cairo. See the "powder of marvellous virtue" in Boccaccio, iii., 8; and iv., 10. Of these intoxicants, properly so termed, I shall have something to say in a future page.</p>
					<p>The use of Bhang doubtless dates from the dawn of civilisation, whose earliest social pleasures would be inebriants. Herodotus (iv. c. 75) shows the Scythians burning the seeds (leaves and capsules) in worship and becoming drunken with the fumes, as do the S. African Bushmen of the present day. This would be the earliest form of smoking: it is still doubtful whether the pipe was used or not. Galen also mentions intoxication by hemp. Amongst Moslems, the Persians adopted the drink as an ecstatic, and about our thirteenth century Egypt, which began the practice, introduced a number of preparations to be noticed in the course of The Nights. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-119" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-120" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The rubbish heaps which outlie Eastern cities, some (near Cairo) are over a hundred feet high. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-120" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-121" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Kurrat al-ayn;" coolness of eyes as opposed to a hot eye ("sakhin") <em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> one red with tears. The term is true and picturesque so I translate it literally. All coolness is pleasant to dwellers in burning lands: thus in Al-Hariri Abu Zayd says of Bassorah, "I found there whatever could fill the eye with coolness." And a "cool booty" (or prize) is one which has been secured without plunging into the flames of war, or simply a pleasant prize. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-121" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-122" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Popularly rendered Caucasus (see Night cdxcvi): it corresponds so far with the Hindu "Udaya" that the sun rises behind it; and the "false dawn" is caused by a hole or gap. It is also the Persian Alborz, the Indian Meru (Sumeru), the Greek Olympus, and the Rhiphæan Range (Veliki Camenypoys) or great starry girdle of the world, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-122" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-123" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Mizr" or "Mizar;" vulg. Búzah; hence the medical Lat. Buza, the Russian Buza (millet beer), our "booze," the O. Dutch "<span xml:lang="nl">buyzen</span>" and the German "<span xml:lang="de">busen</span>." This is the old <span xml:lang="el">ποθὸς θεῖος</span> of negro and negroid Africa; the beer of Osiris, of which dried remains have been found in jars amongst Egyptian tombs. In Equatorial Africa it is known as "Pombe;" on the Upper Nile "Merissa" or "Mirisi" and amongst the Kafirs (Caffers) "Tshuala," "Oala" or "Boyala:" I have also heard of "Buswa" in Central Africa which may be the origin of "Buzah." In the West it became <span xml:lang="el">ζῦθος</span>, (Romaic <span xml:lang="el">πίῤῥα</span>), Xythum and cerevisia or cervisia, the <span xml:lang="la">humor ex hordeo</span>, long before the days of King Gambrinus. Central Africans drink it in immense quantities: in Unyamwezi the standing bedsteads, covered with bark-slabs, are all made sloping so as to drain off the liquor. A chief lives wholly on beef and Pombe which is thick as gruel below. Hops are unknown: the grain, mostly Holcus, is made to germinate, then pounded, boiled and left to ferment. In Egypt the drink is affected chiefly by Berbers, Nubians and slaves from the Upper Nile; but it is a superior article and more like that of Europe than the "Pombe." I have given an account of the manufacture in The Lake Regions of Central Africa, <abbr title="volume">vol.</abbr> ii., p. 286. There are other preparations, Umm-bulbul (mother nightingale), Dinzáyah and Súbiyah, for which I must refer to the Shaykh El-Tounsy. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-123" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-124" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There is a terrible truth in this satire, which reminds us of the noble dame who preferred to her handsome husband the <span xml:lang="fr">palefrenier laid, ord et infâme</span> of Queen Margaret of Navarre (Heptameron No. xx.) We have all known women who sacrificed everything despite themselves, as it were, for the most worthless of men. The world stares and scoffs and blames and understands nothing. There is for every woman one man and one only in whose slavery she is "ready to sweep the floor." Fate is mostly opposed to her meeting him but, when she does, adieu husband and children, honour and religion, life and "soul." Moreover Nature (human) commands the union of contrasts, such as fair and foul, dark and light, tall and short; otherwise mankind would be like the canines, a race of extremes, dwarf as toy-terriers, giants like mastiffs, bald as Chinese "remedy dogs," or hairy as Newfoundlands. The famous Wilkes said only a half-truth when he backed himself, with an hour's start, against the handsomest man in England; his uncommon and remarkable ugliness (he was, as the Italians say, <em><span xml:lang="it">un bel brutto</span></em>), was the highest recommendation in the eyes of very beautiful women. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-124" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-125" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Every Moslem burial-ground has a place of the kind where honourable women may sit and weep unseen by the multitude. These visits are enjoined by the Apostle:—Frequent the cemetery, 'twill make you think of futurity! Also:—Whoever visiteth the graves of his parents (or one of them) every Friday, he shall be written a pious son, even though he might have been in the world, before that, a disobedient. (Pilgrimage ii., 71.) The buildings resemble our European "mortuary chapels." Saíd, Pasha of Egypt, was kind enough to erect one on the island off Suez, for the "use of English ladies who would like shelter whilst weeping and wailing for their dead." But I never heard that any of the ladies went there. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-125" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-126" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Ajal"=the period of life, the appointed time of death: the word is of constant recurrence and is also applied to sudden death. See Lane's Dictionary, <abbr title="sub verbo">s.v.</abbr> <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-126" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-127" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"The dying Badawi to his tribe" (and lover) appears to me highly pathetic. The wild people love to be buried upon hill-slopes whence they can look down upon the camp; and they still call out the names of kinsmen and friends as they pass by the grave-yards. A similar piece occurs in Wetzstein (p. 27, "<span xml:lang="de">Reisebericht ueber Hauran</span>," <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>):—</p>
					<div class="c016 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">O bear with you my bones where the camel bears his load ✿ And bury me before you, if buried I must be;</div>
								<div class="line">And let me not be buried 'neath the burden of the vine ✿ But high upon the hill whence your sight I ever see!</div>
								<div class="line">As you pass along my grave cry aloud and name your names ✿ The crying of your names shall revive the bones of me:</div>
								<div class="line">I have fasted through my life with my friends, and in my death, ✿ I will feast when we meet, on that day of joy and glee.</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-127" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-128" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Akásirah (<abbr title="plural">plur.</abbr> of Kasrá=Chosroës) is here a title of the four great dynasties of Persian Kings. 1. The Peshdadian or Assyrian race, proto-historics for whom dates fail; 2. The Káyánián (Medes and Persians) who ended with the Alexandrian invasion in B.C. 331; 3. The Ashkánián (Parthenians or Arsacides) who ruled till A.D. 202; and 4. The Sassanides which have already been mentioned. But strictly speaking "Kisri" and "Kasra" are titles applied only to the latter dynasty and especially to the great King Anushirwan. They must not be confounded with "Khusrau" (P.N. Cyrus, Ahasuerus? Chosroës?); and yet the three seem to have combined in "Cæsar," Kaysar and Czar. For details especially connected with Zoroaster see <abbr title="volume">vol.</abbr> I, p. 380 of the Dabistan or School of Manners, translated by David Shea and Anthony Troyer, Paris, 1843. The book is most valuable, but the proper names are so carelessly and incorrectly printed that the student is led into perpetual error. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-128" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-129" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The words are the very lowest and coarsest; but the scene is true to Arab life. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-129" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-130" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Hayhát:" the word, written in a variety of ways is onomatopoetic, like our "heigh-ho!" it sometimes means "far from me (or you) be it!" but in popular usage it is simply "Alas." <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-130" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-131" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lane (i., 134) finds a date for the book in this passage. The Soldan of Egypt, Mohammed ibn Kala'ún, in the early eighth century (Hijrah=our fourteenth), issued a sumptuary law compelling Christians and Jews to wear indigo-blue and saffron-yellow turbans, the white being reserved for Moslems. But the custom was much older and Mandeville (<abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> ix.) describes it in A.D. 1322 when it had become the rule. And it still endures; although abolished in the cities it is the rule for Christians, at least in the country parts of Egypt and Syria. I may here remark that such detached passages as these are absolutely useless for chronology: they may be simply the additions of editors or mere copyists. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-131" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-132" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The ancient "Mustapha"=the Chosen (prophet, <em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> Mohammed), also titled Al-Mujtabá, the Accepted (Pilgrimage, ii., 309). "Murtazá"=the Elect, <em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> the Caliph Ali is the older "Mortada" or "Mortadi" of Ockley and his day, meaning "one pleasing to (or acceptable to) Allah." Still older writers corrupted it to "Mortis Ali" and readers supposed this to be the Caliph's name. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-132" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-133" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The gleam (zodiacal light) preceding the true dawn; the Persians call the former Subh-i-kázib (false or lying dawn) opposed to Subh-i-sádik (true dawn) and suppose that it is caused by the sun shining through a hole in the world-encircling Mount Kaf. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-133" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-134" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>So the <abbr title="Hebrew">Heb.</abbr> "Arún"=naked, means wearing the lower robe only;=our "in his shirt." <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-134" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-135" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here we have the vulgar Egyptian colloquialism "Aysh" (= Ayyu shayyin) for the classical "Má" = what. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-135" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-136" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"In the name of Allah!" here said before taking action. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-136" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-137" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Mamlúk" (<abbr title="plural">plur.</abbr> Mamálik) lit. a chattel; and in The Nights a white slave trained to arms. The "Mameluke Beys" of Egypt were locally called the "Ghuzz." I use the convenient word in its old popular sense;</p>
					<div class="c016 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">'Tis sung, there's a valiant Mameluke</div>
								<div class="line">In foreign lands ycleped (<em>Sir Luke</em>)—</div>
							</div>
							<div class="group">
								<div>
									<span class="sc">Hudibras.</span>
								</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>And hence, probably, Molière's "Mamamouchi"; and the modern French use "Mamaluc." See Savary's Letters, No. xl. <a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-137" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-138" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The name of this celebrated successor of Nineveh, where some suppose The Nights were written, is orig. <span xml:lang="el">Μεσοπύλαι</span> (middle-gates) because it stood on the way where four great highways meet. The <abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> form "Mausil" (the vulgar "Mosul") is also significant, alluding to the "junction" of Assyria and Babylonia. Hence our "muslin." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-138" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-139" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is Mr. Thackeray's "nose-bag." I translate by "walking-shoes" the Arab "Khuff" which are a manner of loose boot covering the ankle; they are not usually embroidered, the ornament being reserved for the inner shoe. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-139" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-140" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> Syria (says Abulfeda) the "land on the left" (of one facing the east) as opposed to Al-Yaman the "land on the right." Osmani would mean Turkish, Ottoman. When Bernard the Wise (Bohn, p. 24) speaks of "Bagada and Axiam" (Mabillon's text) or "Axinarri" (still worse), he means Baghdad and Ash-Shám (Syria, Damascus), the latter word puzzling his Editor. Richardson (<abbr title="Dissertation">Dissert.</abbr> lxxii) seems to support a hideous attempt to derive Shám from Shámat, a mole or wart, because the country is studded with hillocks! Al-Shám is often applied to Damascus-city whose proper name Dimishk belongs to books: this term is generally derived from Dimáshik b. Káli b. Málik b. Sham (Shem). Lee (Ibn Batútah, 29) denies that ha-Dimishki means "Eliezer of Damascus." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-140" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-141" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From Oman=Eastern Arabia. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-141" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-142" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Tamar Hanná" lit. date of Henna, but applied to the flower of the eastern privet (<em>Lawsonia inermis</em>) which has the sweet scent of freshly mown hay. The use of Henna as a dye is known even in England. The "myrtle" alluded to may either have been for a perfume (as it is held an anti-intoxicant) or for eating, the bitter aromatic berries of the "Ás" being supposed to flavour wine and especially Raki (raw brandy). <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-142" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-143" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lane. (i. 211) pleasantly remarks, "A list of these sweets is given in my original, but I have thought it better to omit the names" (!) Dozy does not shirk his duty, but he is not much more satisfactory in explaining words interesting to students because they are unfound in dictionaries and forgotten by the people "Akrás" (cakes) Laymuníyah (of limes) wa "Maymuníyah" appears in the Bresl. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> as "Ma'amuniyah" which may mean "Ma'amun's cakes" or "delectable cakes." "Amshát"=(combs) perhaps refers to a fine kind of Kunáfah (vermicelli) known in Egypt and Syria as "Ghazl al-banát"=girl's spinning. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-143" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-144" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The new moon carefully looked for by all Moslems because it begins the Ramazán-fast. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-144" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-145" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Solomon's signet ring has before been noticed. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-145" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-146" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The "high-bosomed" damsel, with breasts firm as a cube, is a favourite with Arab tale-tellers. <em><span xml:lang="it">Fanno baruffa</span></em> is the Italian term for hard breasts pointing outwards. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-146" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-147" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A large hollow navel is looked upon not only as a beauty, but in children it is held a promise of good growth. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-147" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-148" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Ka'ah," a high hall opening upon the central court: we shall find the word used for a mansion, barrack, men's quarters, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-148" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-149" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Babel=Gate of God (El), or Gate of Ilu (P.N. of God), which the Jews ironically interpreted "Confusion." The tradition of Babylonia being the very centre of witchcraft and enchantment by means of its Seven Deadly Spirits, has survived in Al-Islam; the two fallen angels (whose names will occur) being confined in a well; Nimrod attempting to reach Heaven from the Tower in a magical car drawn by monstrous birds and so forth. See p. 114, Francois Lenormant's "Chaldean Magic," London, Bagsters. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-149" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-150" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Kámat Alfiyyah"=like the letter Alif, a straight perpendicular stroke. In the Egyptian hieroglyphs, the origin of every alphabet (not syllabarium) known to man, one form was a flag or leaf of water-plant standing upright. Hence probably the Arabic Alif-shape; while other nations preferred other modifications of the letter (ox's head, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>), which in Egyptian number some thirty-six varieties, simple and compound. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-150" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-151" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I have not attempted to order this marvellous confusion of metaphors so characteristic of The Nights and the exigencies of Al-Saj'a=rhymed prose. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-151" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-152" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here and elsewhere I omit the "kála (<em><span xml:lang="it">dice Turpino</span></em>)" of the original: Torrens preserves "Thus goes the tale" (which it only interrupts). This is simply letter-wise and sense-foolish. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-152" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-153" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Of this worthy more at a future time. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-153" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-154" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em>, sealed with the Kazi or legal authority's seal of office. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-154" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-155" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Nothing for nothing" is a fixed idea with the Eastern woman: not so much for greed as for a sexual <em><span xml:lang="fr">point d'honneur</span></em> when dealing with the adversary—man. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-155" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-156" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>She drinks first, the custom of the universal East, to show that the wine she had bought was unpoisoned. Easterns, who utterly ignore the "social glass" of Western civilisation, drink honestly to get drunk; and, when far gone are addicted to horseplay (in <abbr title="Persian">Pers.</abbr> "Badmasti"=<em><span xml:lang="fr">le vin mauvais</span></em>) which leads to quarrels and bloodshed. Hence it is held highly irreverent to assert of patriarchs, prophets and saints that they "drank wine;" and Moslems agree with our "Teatotallers" in denying that, except in the case of Noah, inebriatives are anywhere mentioned in Holy Writ. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-156" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-157" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Húr al-Ayn," lit. (maids) with eyes of lively white and black, applied to the virgins of Paradise who will wive with the happy Faithful. I retain our vulgar "Houri," warning the reader that it is a <abbr title="masculine">masc.</abbr> for a <abbr title="feminine">fem.</abbr> ("Huríyah") in Arab, although accepted in Persian, a genderless speech. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-157" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-158" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Zambúr," whose head is amputated in female circumcision. See Night cccclxxiv. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-158" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-159" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ocymum basilicum noticed in Introduction; the <span xml:lang="it">bassilico</span> of Boccaccio iv. 5. The Book of Kalilah and Dimnah represents it as "sprouting with something also whose smell is foul and disgusting and the sower at once sets to gather it and burn it with fire." (The Fables of Bidpai translated from the later Syriac version by I. G. N. Keith-Falconer, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>, Cambridge University Press, 1885). Here, however, Habk is a pennyroyal (<em>mentha puligium</em>), and probably alludes to the pecten. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-159" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-160" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> common property for all to beat. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-160" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-161" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"A digit of the moon" is the Hindú equivalent. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-161" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-162" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Better known to us as Caravanserai, the "Travellers' Bungalow" of India: in the Khan, however, shelter is to be had, but neither bed nor board. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-162" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-163" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Zubb." I would again note that this and its synonyms are the equivalents of the Arabic, which is of the lowest. The tale-teller's evident object is to accentuate the contrast with the tragical stories to follow. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-163" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-164" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"In the name of Allah," is here a civil form of dismissal. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-164" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-165" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lane (i. 124) is scandalized and naturally enough by this scene, which is the only blot in an admirable tale admirably told. Yet even here the grossness is but little more pronounced than what we find in our old drama (<em><abbr title="exempli gratia">e.g.</abbr></em>, Shakspeare's King Henry V.) written for the stage, whereas tales like The Nights are not read or recited before both sexes. Lastly "nothing follows all this palming work:" in Europe the orgie would end very differently. These "nuns of Theleme" are physically pure: their debauchery is of the mind, not the body. Galland makes them five, including the two doggesses. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-165" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-166" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>So Sir Francis Walsingham's "They which do that they should not, should hear that they would not." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-166" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-167" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The old "Calendar," pleasantly associated with that form of almanac. The Mac. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> has "Karandaliyah," a vile corruption, like Ibn Batutah's "Karandar" and Torrens' "Kurundul:" so in English we have the accepted vulgarism of "Kernel" for Colonel. The Bul. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> uses for synonym "Su'ulúk"=an asker, a beggar. Of these mendicant monks, for such they are, much like the Sarabaites of mediæval Europe, I have treated, and of their institutions and its founder, Shaykh Sharif Bu Ali Kalandar (ob. A.H. 724=1323-24), at some length in my "History of Sindh," <abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> viii. See also the Dabistan (i, 136) where the good Kalandar exclaims:—</p>
					<div class="c016 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">If the thorn break in my body, how trifling the pain!</div>
								<div class="line">But how sorely I feel for the poor broken thorn!</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>D'Herbelot is right when he says that the Kalandar is not generally approved by Moslems: he labours to win free from every form and observance and he approaches the Malámati who conceals all his good deeds and boasts of his evil doings—our "Devil's hypocrite." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-167" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-168" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The "Kalandar" disfigures himself in this manner to show "mortification." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-168" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-169" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Gharíb:" the porter is offended because the word implies "poor devil;" <abbr title="especially">esp.</abbr> one out of his own country. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-169" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-170" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A religious mendicant generally. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-170" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-171" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Very scandalous to Moslem "respectability": Mohammed said the house was accursed when the voices of women could be heard out of doors. Moreover the neighbours have a right to interfere and abate the scandal. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-171" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-172" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I need hardly say that these are both historical personages; they will often be mentioned, and Ja'afar will be noticed in the terminal Essay. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-172" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-173" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Sama'an wa tá'atan;" a popular phrase of assent generally translated "to hear is to obey;" but this formula may be and must be greatly varied. In places it means "Hearing (the word of Allah) and obeying" (His prophet, viceregent, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>) <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-173" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-174" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Sawáb"=reward in Heaven. This word for which we have no equivalent has been naturalised in all tongues (<em><abbr title="exempli gratia">e.g.</abbr></em> Hindostani) spoken by Moslems. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-174" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-175" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wine-drinking, at all times forbidden to Moslems, vitiates the Pilgrimage-rite: the Pilgrim is vowed to a strict observance of the ceremonial law and many men date their "reformation" from the "Hajj." Pilgrimage, iii., 126. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-175" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-176" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here some change has been necessary; as the original text confuses the three "ladies." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-176" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-177" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Arab-the plural <abbr title="masculine">masc.</abbr> is used by way of modesty when a girl addresses her lover; and for the same reason she speaks of herself as a man. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-177" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-178" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Al-Na'im;" in full "Jannat al-Na'im"=the Garden of Delights, <em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> the fifth Heaven made of white silver. The generic name of Heaven (the place of reward) is "Jannat," lit. a garden; "Firdaus" being evidently derived from the Persian through the Greek <span xml:lang="el">παράδεισος</span>, and meaning a chase, a hunting-park. Writers on this subject should bear in mind Mandeville's modesty, "Of Paradise I cannot speak properly, for I was not there." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-178" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-179" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Mikra'ah," the dried mid-rib of a date-frond used for many purposes, especially the bastinado. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-179" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-180" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>According to Lane (i., 229) these and the immediately following verses are from an ode by Ibn Sahl al-Ishbili. They are in the Bul. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> not the Mac. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-180" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-181" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The original is full of conceits and plays on words which are not easily rendered in English. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-181" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-182" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Tarjumán," same root as Chald. Targum (=a translation), the old "Truchman," and through the Ital. "<span xml:lang="it">tergomano</span>" our "Dragoman;" here a messenger. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-182" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-183" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lit. the "person of the eyes," our "babe of the eyes," a favourite poetical conceit in all tongues; much used by the Elizabethans, but now neglected as a silly kind of conceit. See Night ccix. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-183" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-184" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Sár" (Thár) the revenge-right recognised by law and custom (Pilgrimage, iii., 69) <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-184" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-185" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>That is "We all swim in the same boat." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-185" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-186" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ja'afar ever acts, on such occasions, the part of a wise and sensible man compelled to join in a foolish frolic. He contrasts strongly with the Caliph, a headstrong despot who will not be gainsaid, whatever be the whim of the moment. But Easterns would look upon this as a proof of his "kingliness." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-186" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-187" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Wa'l-Salám" (pronounce Was-Salám); meaning "and here ends the matter." In our slang we say, "All right, and the child's name is Antony." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-187" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-188" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is a favourite jingle; the play being upon "ibrat" (a needle-graver) and "'ibrat" (an example, a warning). <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-188" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-189" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>That is "make his bow;" as the English peasant pulls his forelock. Lane (i., 249) suggests, as an afterthought, that it means:—"Recover thy senses; in allusion to a person's drawing his hand over his head after sleep or a fit." But it occurs elsewhere in the sense of "cut thy stick." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-189" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-190" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This would be a separate building like our family tomb and probably domed, resembling that mentioned in "The King of the Black Islands." Europeans usually call it "a little Wali;" or, as they write it, "Wely;" the contained for the container; the "Santon" for the "Santon's tomb." I have noticed this curious confusion (which begins with Robinson, i. 322) in "Unexplored Syria," i. 161. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-190" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-191" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Wiswás;"=diabolical temptation or suggestion. The "Wiswásí" is a man with scruples (scrupulus, a pebble in the shoe), <em><abbr title="exempli gratia">e.g.</abbr></em> one who fears that his ablutions were deficient, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-191" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-192" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Katf"=pinioning by tying the arms behind the back and shoulders (Kitf), a dire disgrace to freeborn men. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-192" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-193" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Nafs."=<abbr title="Hebrew">Heb.</abbr> Nephesh (Nafash)=soul, life; as opposed to "Ruach"=spirit and breath. In these places it is equivalent to "I said to myself." Another form of the root is "Nafas," breath, with an idea of inspiration: so "Sáhib Nafas" (=master of breath) is a minor saint who heals by expiration, a matter familiar to mesmerists (Pilgrimage, i. 86). <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-193" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-194" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Kaus al-Banduk;" the "pellet-bow" of modern India; with two strings joined by a bit of cloth which supports a ball of dry clay or stone. It is chiefly used for birding. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-194" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-195" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the East blinding was a common practice, especially in the case of junior princes not required as heirs. A deep perpendicular incision was made down each corner of the eyes; the lids were lifted and the balls removed by cutting the optic nerve and the muscles. The later Caliphs blinded their victims by passing a red-hot sword blade close to the orbit or a needle over the eyeball. About the same time in Europe the operation was performed with a heated metal basin—the well-known <em>bacinare</em> (used by Ariosto), as happened to Pier delle Vigne (Petrus de Vineâ), the "godfather of modern Italian." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-195" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-196" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Khinzír" (by Europeans pronounced "Hanzír"), prop. a wild-boar; but popularly used like our "you pig!" <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-196" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-197" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Striking with the shoe, the pipe-stick and similar articles is highly insulting, because they are not made, like whips and scourges, for such purpose. Here the East and the West differ diametrically. "Wounds which are given by instruments which are in one's hands by chance do not disgrace a man," says Cervantes (D. Q. i., <abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> 15), and goes on to prove that if a Zapatero (cobbler) cudgel another with his form or last, the latter must not consider himself cudgelled. The reverse in the East where a blow of a pipe-stick cost Mahommed Ali Pasna's son his life: Ishmail Pasha was burned to death by Malik Nimr, chief of Shendy (Pilgrimage, i., 203). Moreover, the actual wound is less considered in Moslem law than the instrument which caused it: so sticks and stones are venial weapons, whilst sword and dagger, gun and pistol are felonious. See <em><abbr title="ibidem">ibid.</abbr></em> (i., 336) for a note upon the weapons with which nations are policed. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-197" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-198" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Incest is now abominable everywhere except amongst the overcrowded poor of great and civilised cities. Yet such unions were common and lawful amongst ancient and highly cultivated peoples, as the Egyptians (Isis and Osiris), Assyrians and ancient Persians. Physiologically they are injurious only when the parents have constitutional defects: if both are sound, the issue, as amongst the so-called "lower animals," is viable and healthy. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-198" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-199" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dwellers in the Northern Temperates can hardly imagine what a dust-storm is in sun-parched tropical lands. In Sind we were often obliged to use candles at midday, while above the dust was a sun that would roast an egg. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-199" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-200" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "'Urban," now always used of the wild people, whom the French have taught us to call <em><span xml:lang="fr">les Bedouins</span></em>; "Badw" being a waste or desert; and Badawi (<abbr title="feminine">fem.</abbr> Badawíyah, <abbr title="plural">plur.</abbr> Badáwi and Bidwán), a man of the waste. Europeans have also learnt to miscall the Egyptians "Arabs": the difference is as great as between an Englishman and a Spaniard. Arabs proper divide their race into sundry successive families. "The Arab al-Arabá" (or al-Aribah, or al-Urubíyat) are the autochthones, prehistoric, proto-historic and extinct tribes; for instance, a few of the Adites who being at Meccah escaped the destruction of their wicked nation, but mingled with other classes. The "Arab al-Muta'arribah," (Arabised Arabs) are the first advenæ represented by such noble strains as the Koraysh (Koreish), some still surviving. The "Arab al-Musta'aribah," (insititious, naturalised or instituted Arabs, men who claim to be Arabs) are Arabs like the Sinaites, the Egyptians and the Maroccans descended by intermarriage with other races. Hence our "Mosarabians" and the "Marrabais" of Rabelais (not, "a word compounded of Maurus and Arabs"). Some genealogists, however, make the Muta'arribah descendants of Kahtan (possible the Joktan of Genesis x., a comparatively modern document, B.C. 700?); and the Musta'aribah those descended from Adnán the origin of Arab genealogy. And, lastly, are the "Arab al-Musta'ajimah," barbarised Arabs, like the present population of Meccah and Al-Medinah. Besides these there are other tribes whose origin is still unknown; such as the Mahrah tribes of Hazramaut, the "Akhdám" (=serviles) of Oman (Maskat); and the "Ebná" of Al-Yaman: Ibn Ishak supposes the latter to be descended from the Persian soldiers of Anushirwan who expelled the Abyssinian invader from Southern Arabia. (Pilgrimage, iii., 31, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>). <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-200" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-201" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Amír al-Muuminín." The title was assumed by the Caliph Omar to obviate the inconvenience of calling himself "Khalífah" (successor) of the Khalífah of the Apostle of Allah (<em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> Abu Bakr); which after a few generations would become impossible. It means "Emir (chief or prince) of the Muumins;" men who hold to the (true Moslem) Faith, the "Imán" (theory, fundamental articles) as opposed to the "Dín," ordinance or practice of the religion. It once became a Wazirial title conferred by Sultan Malikshah (King King-king) on his Nizám al-Mulk. (Richardson's <abbr title="Dissertation">Dissert.</abbr> lviii). <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-201" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-202" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This may also mean "according to the seven editions of the Koran," the old revisions and so forth (Sale, Sect. iii. and D'Herbelot "Alcoran.") The schools of the "Mukri," who teach the right pronunciation wherein a mistake might be sinful, are seven, Hamzah, Ibn Katír, Ya'akúb, Ibn Amir, Kisái, Asim and Hafs, the latter being the favourite with the Hanafis and the only one now generally known in Al-Islam. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-202" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-203" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Sadd"=wall, dyke, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> the "bund" or "band" of Anglo-India. Hence the "Sadd" on the Nile, the banks of grass and floating islands which "wall" the stream. There are few sights more appalling than a sandstorm in the desert, the "Zauba'ah" as the Arabs call it. Devils, or pillars of sand, vertical and inclined, measuring a thousand feet high, rush over the plain lashing the sand at their base like a sea surging under a furious whirlwind; shearing the grass clean away from the roots, tearing up trees, which are whirled like leaves and sticks in air, and sweeping away tents and houses as if they were bits of paper. At last the columns join at the top and form, perhaps three thousand feet above the earth, a gigantic cloud of yellow sand which obliterates not only the horizon but even the midday sun. These sand-spouts are the terror of travellers. In Sind and the Punjab we have the dust-storm which for darkness, I have said, beats the blackest London fog. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-203" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-204" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> Sár=the vendetta, before mentioned, as dreaded in Arabia as in Corsica. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-204" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-205" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Ghútah," usually a place where irrigation is abundant. It especially applies (in books) to the Damascus-plain because "it abounds with water and fruit trees." Bochart (Geog. Sacra, p. 90) derives <span xml:lang="he">עוטה</span> (utah) from <span xml:lang="he">עוץ</span> Uz, son of Arab, who (he says) founded Damascus. The Ghutah is one of the four earthly paradises, the others being Basrah (Bassorah), Shiraz and Samarcand. Its peculiarity is the likeness to a seaport; the Desert which rolls up almost to its doors being the sea and its ships being the camels. The first Arab to whom we owe this admirable term for the "Companion of Job" is "Tarafah" one of the poets of the Suspended Poems: he likens (v.v. 3, 4) the camels which bore away his beloved to ships sailing from Aduli. But "ships of the desert" is doubtless a term of the highest antiquity. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-205" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-206" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The exigencies of the "Saj'a," or rhymed prose, disjoint this and many similar passages. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-206" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-207" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The "Ebony" Islands; Scott's "Isle of Ebene," i., 217. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-207" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-208" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Jarjarís" in the Bul. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-208" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-209" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Takbís." Many Easterns can hardly sleep without this kneading of the muscles, this "rubbing" whose hygienic properties England is now learning. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-209" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-210" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The converse of the breast being broadened, the drooping, "draggle-tail" gait compared with the head held high and the chest inflated. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-210" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-211" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This penalty is mentioned in the Koran (<abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> v.) as fit for those who fight against Allah and his Apostle; but commentators are not agreed if the sinners are first to be put to death or to hang on the cross till they die. Pharaoh (chapt xx.) threatens to crucify his magicians on palm-trees, and is held to be the first crucifier. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-211" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-212" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "'Ajami"=foreigner, <abbr title="especially">esp.</abbr> a Persian: the latter in The Nights is mostly a villain. I must here remark that the contemptible condition of Persians in Al-Hijáz (which I noted in 1852, Pilgrimage i. 327) has completely changed. They are no longer, "The slippers of Ali and hounds of Omar:" they have learned the force of union and now, instead of being bullied, they bully. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-212" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-213" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Calc. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> turns them into Tailors (Khayyátín) and Torrens does not see the misprint. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-213" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-214" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> Axe and sandals. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-214" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-215" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lit. "Strike his neck." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-215" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-216" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A phrase which will frequently recur; meaning the situation suggested such words as these. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-216" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-217" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The smiter with the evil eye is called "A'in" and the person smitten "Ma'ín" or "Ma'ún." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-217" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-218" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Sákiyah," the well-known Persian wheel with pots and buckets attached to the tire. It is of many kinds, the boxed, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>; and it is possibly alluded to in the "pitcher broken at the fountain" (Ecclesiastes xii. 6) an accident often occurring to the modern "Noria." Travellers mostly abuse its "dismal creaking" and "mournful monotony": I have defended the music of the water-wheel in Pilgrimage ii. 198. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-218" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-219" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Zikr" lit. remembering, mentioning (<em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> the names of Allah), here refers to the meetings of religious for devotional exercises; the "Zikkírs," as they are called, mostly standing or sitting in a circle while they ejaculate the Holy Name. These "rogations" are much affected by Darwayshes, or begging friars, whom Europe politely divides into "dancing" and "howling"; and, on one occasion, greatly to the scandal of certain Engländerinns to whom I was showing the Ezbekiyah I joined the ring of "howlers." Lane (Mod. Egypt, see index) is profuse upon the subject of "Zikrs" and Zikkírs. It must not be supposed that they are uneducated men: the better class, however, prefers more privacy. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-219" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-220" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As they thought he had been there for prayer or penance. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-220" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-221" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Ziyárat," a visit to a pious person or place. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-221" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-222" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is a paternal salute in the East where they are particular about the part kissed. A witty and not unusually gross Persian book, called the "Al-Námah" because all questions begin with "Al" (the Arab article) contains one "Al-Wajib al-busídan?" (what best deserves bussing?) and the answer is "Kus-i-nau-pashm," (a bobadilla with a young bush). <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-222" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-223" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A weight of 71-72 English grains in gold; here equivalent to the dinar. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-223" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-224" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Compare the tale of The Three Crows in Gammer Grethel, Evening ix. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-224" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-225" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The comparison is peculiarly apposite; the earth seen from above appears hollow with a raised rim. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-225" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-226" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A hundred years old. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-226" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-227" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Bahr" in <abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> means sea, river, piece of water; hence the adjective is needed. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-227" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-228" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Captain or Master of the ship (not the owner). In Al Yaman the word also means a "barber," in virtue of the root, Raas, a head. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-228" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-229" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The text has "in the character Ruká'í," or Riká'í, the correspondence-hand. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-229" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-230" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A curved character supposed to be like the basil-leaf (rayhán). Richardson calls it "Rohani." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-230" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-231" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I need hardly say that Easterns use a reed, a Calamus (Kalam applied only to the cut reed) for our quills and steel pens. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-231" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-232" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Famous for being inscribed on the Kiswah (cover) of Mohammed's tomb; a large and more formal hand still used for engrossing and for mural inscriptions. Only seventy-two varieties of it are known (Pilgrimage, ii., 82). <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-232" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-233" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The copying and transcribing hand which is either Arabi or Ajami. A great discovery has lately been made which upsets all our old ideas of Cufic, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> Mr. Löytved of Bayrut has found, amongst the Hauranic inscriptions, one in pure Naskhi, dating A.D. 568, or fifty years before the Hijrah; and it is accepted as authentic by my learned friend M. Ch. Clermont-Ganneau (p. 193, Pal. Explor. Fund; July 1884). In D'Herbelot and Sale's day the Koran was supposed to have been written in rude characters, like those subsequently called "Cufic," invented shortly before Mohammed's birth by Murámir ibn Murrah of Anbar in Irák, introduced into Meccah by Bashar the Kindian, and perfected by Ibn Muklah (Al-Wazir, ob. A.H. 328=940). We must now change all that. See Catalogue of Oriental Caligraphs, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>, by G. P. Badger, London, Whiteley, 1885. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-233" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-234" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Capital and uncial letters; the hand in which the Ka'abah veil is inscribed (Pilgrimage iii. 299, 300). <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-234" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-235" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A "Court hand" says Mr. Payne (i. 112): I know nothing of it. Other hands are: the Ta'alík; hanging or oblique, used for finer <abbr title="Manuscripts">MSS.</abbr> and having, according to Richardson, "the same analogy to the Naskhi as our Italic has to the Roman." The Nasta' lík (not Naskh-Ta'alík) much used in India, is, as the name suggests, a mixture of the Naskhi (writing of transactions) and the Ta'alík. The Shikastah (broken hand) everywhere represents our running hand and becomes a hard task to the reader. The Kirmá is another cursive character, mostly confined to the receipts and disbursements of the Turkish treasury. The Diváni, or Court (of Justice) is the official hand, bold and round, a business character, the lines often rising with a sweep or curve towards the (left) end. The Jáli or polished has a variety, the Jali-Ta'alik: the Sulsi (known in many books) is adopted for titles of volumes, royal edicts, diplomas and so forth; "answering much the same purpose as capitals with us, or the flourished letters in illuminated manuscripts" (Richardson). The Tughrái is that of the Tughrá, the Prince's cypher or flourishing signature in ceremonial writings, and containing some such sentence as: Let this be executed. There are others <em><abbr title="exempli gratia">e.g.</abbr></em> Yákuti and Sirenkil known only by name. Finally the Maghribi (Moorish) hand differs in form and diacritical points from the characters used further east almost as much as German running hand does from English. It is curious that Richardson omits the Jali (intricate and convoluted) and the divisions of the Sulusí, Sulsi or Sulus (Thuluth) character, the Sulus al-Khafíf, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-235" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-236" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Baghlah"; the male (Baghl) is used only for loads. This is everywhere the rule: nothing is more unmanageable than a restive "Macho"; and he knows that he can always get you off his back when so minded. From "Baghlah" is derived the name of the native craft Anglo-Indicè a "Buggalow." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-236" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-237" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In <abbr title="Hebrew">Heb.</abbr> "Ben-Adam" is any man opp. to "Beni ish" (Psalm iv. 3)=<em><span xml:lang="la">filii viri</span></em>, not <em><span xml:lang="la">homines</span></em>. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-237" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-238" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This posture is terribly trying to European legs; and few white men (unless brought up to it) can squat for any time on their heels. The "tailor-fashion," with crossed legs, is held to be free and easy. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-238" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-239" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Katá"=Pterocles Alchata, the well-known sand-grouse of the desert. It is very poor white flesh. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-239" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-240" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Khubz" which I do not translate "cake" or "bread," as that would suggest the idea of our loaf. The staff of life in the East is a thin flat circle of dough baked in the oven or on the griddle, and corresponding with the Scotch "scone," the Spanish "tortilla" and the Australian "flap-jack." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-240" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-241" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Harísah," a favourite dish of wheat (or rice) boiled and reduced to a paste with shredded meat, spices and condiments. The "bangles" is a pretty girl eating with him. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-241" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-242" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These lines are repeated with a difference in Night cccxxx. They affect <em>Rims cars</em>, out of the way, heavy rhymes: <em><abbr title="exempli gratia">e.g.</abbr></em> here Sakáríj (<abbr title="plural">plur.</abbr> of Sakrúj, platters, porringers); Tayáhíj (<abbr title="plural">plur.</abbr> of Tayhúj, the smaller caccabis-partridge); Tabáhíj (Persian Tabahjah, an omelet or a stew of meat, onions, eggs, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>) Ma'áríj ("in stepped piles" like the pyramids; which Lane ii. 495, renders "on the stairs"); Makáríj (<abbr title="plural">plur.</abbr> of Makraj, a small pot); Damálíj (<abbr title="plural">plur.</abbr> of dumlúj, a bracelet, a bangle); Dayábíj (brocades) and Tafáríj (openings, enjoyments). In Night cccxxx. we find also Sikábíj (<abbr title="plural">plur.</abbr> of Sikbáj, marinated meat elsewhere explained); Faráríj (<abbr title="plural">plur.</abbr> of farrúj, a chicken, vulg. farkh) and Dakákíj (<abbr title="plural">plur.</abbr> of dakújah, a small jar). In the first line we have also (though not a rhyme) Gharánik <abbr title="Greek">Gr.</abbr> <span xml:lang="el">Τερανὸς</span>, a crane, preserved in Romaic. The weeping and wailing are caused by the remembrance that all these delicacies have been demolished like a Badawi camp. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-242" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-243" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is the <em><span xml:lang="la">vinum coctum</span></em>, the boiled wine, still a favourite in Southern Italy and Greece. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-243" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-244" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Eastern topers delight in drinking at dawn: upon this subject I shall have more to say in other Nights. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-244" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-245" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Adab," a <em><span xml:lang="la">crux</span></em> to translators, meaning anything between good education and good manners. In mod. Turk. "Edibiyyet" (Adabiyat)=belles lettres and "Edebi" or "Edíb"=a littérateur. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-245" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-246" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Caliph Al-Maamún, who was a bad player, used to say, "I have the administration of the world and am equal to it, whereas I am straitened in the ordering of a space of two spans by two spans." The "board" was then "a square field of well-dressed leather." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-246" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-247" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Rabbis (after Matth. xix. 12) count three kinds of Eunuchs; (1) Seris chammah=of the sun, <em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> natural: (2) Seris Adam=manufactured <em><span xml:lang="la">per homines</span></em>; and (3) Seris Chammayim=of God (<em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> religious abstainer). Seris (castrated) or Abd (slave) is the general Hebrew name. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-247" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-248" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The "Lady of Beauty." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-248" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-249" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Káf" has been noticed as the mountain which surrounds earth as a ring does the finger: it is popularly used like our Alp and Alpine. The "circumambient Ocean" (Bahr al-muhít) is the Homeric Ocean-stream. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-249" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-250" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The pomegranate is probably chosen here because each fruit is supposed to contain one seed from Eden-garden. Hence a host of superstitions (Pilgrimage iii., 104) possibly connected with the Chaldaic-Babylonian god Rimmon or Ramanu. Hence Persephone or Ishtar tasted the "rich pomegranate's seed." Lenormant, <abbr title="loco citato">loc. cit.</abbr> pp. 166,182. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-250" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-251" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> for the love of God—a favourite Moslem phrase. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-251" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-252" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Báb," also meaning a chapter (of magic, of war, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>), corresponding with the Persian "Dar" as in Sad-dar, the Hundred Doors. Here, however, it is figurative "I tried a new mode." This scene is in the Mabinogion. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-252" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-253" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I use this Irish term=crying for the dead; as English wants the word for the præfica or myrialogist. The practice is not encouraged in Al-Islam; and Caliph Abu Bakr said, "Verily a corpse is sprinkled with boiling water by reason of the lamentations of the living," <em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> punished for not having taken measures to prevent their profitless lamentations. But the practice is from Negroland whence it reached Egypt; and the people have there developed a curious system in the "weeping-song": I have noted this in "The Lake-Regions of Central Africa." In Zoroastrianism (Dabistan, <abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> xcvii.) tears shed for the dead form a river in hell, black and frigid. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-253" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-254" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These lines are hardly translateable. <abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Sabr" means "patience" as well as "aloes," hereby lending itself to a host of puns and double entendres more or less vile. The aloe, according to Burckhardt, is planted in grave-yards as a lesson of patience: it is also slung, like the dried crocodile, over house-doors to prevent evil spirits entering; "thus hung without earth and water," says Lane (M. E., <abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> xi.), "it will live for several years and even blossom. Hence (?) it is called <em><span xml:lang="uz">Sabr</span></em>, which signifies patience." But Sibr as well as Sabr (a root) means "long-sufferance." I hold the practise to be one of the many Inner African superstitions. The wild Gallas to the present day plant aloes on graves, and suppose that when the plant sprouts the deceased has been admitted to the gardens of Wák, the Creator. (Pilgrimage iii. 350). <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-254" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-255" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Every city in the East has its specific title: this was given to Baghdad either on account of its superior police or simply because it was the Capital of the Caliphate. The Tigris was also called the "River of Peace (or Security)." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-255" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-256" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is very characteristic: the passengers finding themselves in difficulties at once take command. See in my Pilgrimage (I. <abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> xi.) how we beat and otherwise maltreated the Captain of the "Golden Wire." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-256" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-257" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The fable is probably based on the currents which, as in Eastern Africa, will carry a ship fifty miles a day out of her course. We first find it in Ptolemy (vii. 2) whose Maniólai Islands, of India extra Gangem, cause iron nails to fly out of ships, the effect of the Lapis Herculeus (Loadstone). Rabelais (v. c. 37) alludes to it and to the vulgar idea of magnetism being counteracted by Skordon (<em>Scordon</em> or garlic). Hence too the Adamant (Loadstone) Mountains of Mandeville (<abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> xxvii.) and the "Magnetic Rock" in Mr. Puttock's clever "Peter Wilkins." I presume that the myth also arose from seeing craft built, as on the East African Coast, without iron nails. We shall meet with the legend again. The word Jabal ("Jebel" in Egypt) often occurs in these pages. The Arabs apply it to any rising ground or heap of rocks; so it is not always=our mountain. It has found its way to Europe <em><abbr title="exempli gratia">e.g.</abbr></em> Gibraltar and Monte Gibello (or Mongibel in poetry)="Mt. Ethne that men clepen Mounte Gybelle." Other special senses of Jabal will occur. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-257" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-258" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As we learn from the Nubian Geographer the Arabs in early ages explored the Fortunate Islands, Jazírát al-Khálidát (=Eternal Isles), or Canaries, on one of which were reported a horse and horseman in bronze with his spear pointing west. Ibn al-Wardi notes "two images of hard stone, each an hundred cubits high, and upon the top of each a figure of copper pointing with its hand backwards, as though it would say:—Return for there is nothing behind me!" But this legend attaches to older doings. The 23rd Tobba (who succeeded Bilkis), Malik bin Sharhabíl, (or Sharabíl or Sharahíl) surnamed Náshir al-Ni'ám=scatterer of blessings, lost an army in attempting the Western sands and set up a statue of copper upon whose breast was inscribed in antique characters:—</p>
					<div class="c016 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">There is no access behind me,</div>
								<div class="line">Nothing beyond,</div>
								<div class="line">(Saith) The Son of Sharabíl.</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-258" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-259" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> I exclaimed "Bismillah!" <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-259" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-260" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The lesser ablution of hands, face and feet; a kind of "washing the points." More in Night ccccxl. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-260" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-261" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Ruka'tayn"; the number of these bows which are followed by the prostrations distinguishes the five daily prayers. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-261" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-262" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The "Beth Kol" of the Hebrews; also called by the Moslems "Hátif"; for which ask the Spiritualists. It is the Hindu "voice divine" or "voice from heaven." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-262" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-263" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These formulæ are technically called Tasmiyah, Tahlíl (before noted) and Takbír: the "testifying" is Tashhíd. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-263" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-264" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Samn," (<abbr title="Persian">Pers.</abbr> "Raughan" Hind. "Ghi") the "single sauce" of the East; fresh butter set upon the fire, skimmed and kept (for a century if required) in leather bottles and demijohns. Then it becomes a hard black mass, considered a panacea for wounds and diseases. It is very "filling": you say jocosely to an Eastern threatened with a sudden inroad of guests, "Go, swamp thy rice with Raughan." I once tried training, like a Hindu Pahlawan or athlete, on Gur (raw sugar), milk and Ghi; and the result was being blinded by bile before the week ended. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-264" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-265" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These handsome youths are always described in the terms we should apply to women. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-265" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-266" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Bul. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> (i. 43) reads otherwise:—I found a garden and a second and a third and so on till they numbered thirty and nine; and, in each garden, I saw what praise will not express, of trees and rills and fruits and treasures. At the end of the last I sighted a door and said to myself, "What may be in this place?; needs must I open it and look in!" I did so accordingly and saw a courser ready saddled and bridled and picketed; so I loosed and mounted him; and he flew with me like a bird till he set me down on a terrace-roof; and, having landed me, he struck me a whisk with his tail and put out mine eye and fled from me. Thereupon I descended from the roof and found ten youths all blind of one eye who, when they saw me exclaimed, "No welcome to thee, and no good cheer!" I asked them, "Do ye admit me to your home and society?" and they answered, "No, by Allah, thou shalt not live amongst us." So I went forth with weeping eyes and grieving heart, but Allah had written my safety on the Guarded Tablet so I reached Baghdad in safety, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> This is a fair specimen of how the work has been curtailed in that issue. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-266" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-267" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arabs date pregnancy from the stopping of the menses, upon which the fœtus is supposed to feed. Kalilah wa Dimnah says, "The child's navel adheres to that of his mother and thereby he sucks" (i. 263). <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-267" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-268" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is contrary to the commands of Al-Islam; Mohammed expressly said "The Astrologers are liars, by the Lord of the Ka'abah!"; and his saying is known to almost all Moslems, lettered or unlettered. Yet, the further we go East (Indiawards) the more we find these practises held in honour. Turning westwards we have:</p>
					<div class="c016 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">Iuridicis, Erebo, Fisco, fas vivere rapto;</div>
								<div class="line">Militibus, Medicis, Tortori occidere ludo est;</div>
								<div class="line">Mentiri Astronomis, Pictoribus atque Poetis.</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-268" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-269" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He does not perform the Wuzu or lesser ablution because he neglects his dawn prayers. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-269" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-270" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For this game see Lane (M. E. <abbr title="Chapter">Chapt.</abbr> xvii.) It is usually played on a checked cloth not on a board like our draughts; and Easterns are fond of eating, drinking and smoking between and even during the games. Torrens (p. 142) translates "I made up some dessert," confounding "Mankalah" with "Nukl" (dried fruit, quatre-mendiants). <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-270" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-271" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Quoted from Mohammed whose saying has been given. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-271" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-272" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>We should say "the night of the thirty-ninth." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-272" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-273" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The bath first taken after sickness. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-273" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-274" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Dikák" used by way of soap or rather to soften the skin: the meal is usually of lupins, "Adas"="<em>Revalenta Arabica</em>," which costs a penny in Egypt and half-a-crown in England. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-274" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-275" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Sukkar-nabát." During my day (1842-49) we had no other sugar in the Bombay Presidency. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-275" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-276" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is one of the myriad Arab instances that the decrees of "Anagké," Fate, Destiny, Weird, are inevitable. The situation is highly dramatic; and indeed The Nights, as will appear in the terminal Essay, have already suggested a national drama. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-276" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-277" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Having lately been moved by Ajib. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-277" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-278" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mr. Payne (i. 131.) omits these lines which appear out of place; but this mode of inappropriate quotation is a characteristic of Eastern tales. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-278" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-279" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Anglicè "him." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-279" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-280" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This march of the tribe is a <em><span xml:lang="fr">lieu commun</span></em> of Arab verse <em><abbr title="exempli gratia">e.g.</abbr></em> the poet Labid's noble elegy on the "Deserted Camp." We shall find scores of instances in The Nights. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-280" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-281" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I have heard of such sands in the Desert east of Damascus which can be crossed only on boards or camel furniture; and the same is reported of the infamous Region "Al-Ahkáf" ("Unexplored Syria"). <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-281" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-282" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hence the <abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> saying "The bark of a dog and not the gleam of a fire;" the tired traveller knows from the former that the camp is near, whereas the latter shows from great distances. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-282" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-283" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dark blue is the colour of mourning in Egypt as it was of the Roman Republic. The Persians hold that this tint was introduced by Kay Kawús (B.C. 600) when mourning for his son Siyáwush. It was continued till the death of Husayn on the 10th of Muharram (the first month, then representing the vernal equinox) when it was changed for black. As a rule Moslems do not adopt this symbol of sorrow (called "Hidád"), looking upon the practice as somewhat idolatrous and foreign to Arab manners. In Egypt and especially on the Upper Nile women dye their hands with indigo and stain their faces black or blacker. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-283" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-284" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The older Roc, of which more in the Tale of Sindbad. Meanwhile the reader curious about the Persian Símurgh (thirty bird) will consult the Dabistan, i., 55, 191 and iii., 237, and Richardson's Diss. p. xlviii. For the Anka (Enka or Unka=long-necked bird) see Dab. iii., 249 and for the Humá (bird of Paradise) Richardson lxix. We still lack details concerning the Ben or Bennu (nycticorax) of Egypt which with the Article pi gave rise to the Greek "phœnix." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-284" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-285" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Probably the <em>Haledj</em> of Forskal (p. xcvi. Flor. Ægypt. <abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr>), "lignum tenax, durum, obscuri generis." The Bres. Edit, has "ákúl"=teak wood, vulg. "Sáj." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-285" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-286" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The knocker ring is an invention well known to the Romans. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-286" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-287" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Sadr"; the place of honour; hence the "Sudder Adawlut" (Supreme Court) in the Anglo-Indian jargon. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-287" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-288" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Ahlan wa sahlan wa marhabá," the words still popularly addressed to a guest. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-288" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-289" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This may mean "liquid black eyes"; but also, as I have noticed, that the lashes were long and thick enough to make the eyelids appear as if Kohl-powder had been applied to the inner rims. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-289" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-290" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A slight parting between the two front incisors, the upper only, is considered a beauty by Arabs; why it is hard to say except for the racial love of variety. "Sughr" (Thugr) in the text means, primarily, the opening of the mouth, the gape: hence the front teeth. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-290" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-291" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> makes me taste the bitterness of death, "bursting the gall-bladder" (Marárah) being our "breaking the heart." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-291" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-292" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Almost needless to say that forbidden doors and rooms form a <em><span xml:lang="fr">lieu commun</span></em> in Fairie: they are found in the Hindu Katha Sarit Sagara and became familiar to our childhood by "Bluebeard." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-292" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-293" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lit. "apply Kohl to my eyes," even as Jezebel "painted her face," in <abbr title="Hebrew">Heb.</abbr> put her eyes in painting (2 Kings ix., 30). <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-293" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-294" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Al-Barkúk," whence our older "Apricock." Classically it is "Burkúk" and <abbr title="Persian">Pers.</abbr> for <abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Mishmish," and it also denotes a small plum or damson. In Syria the "side next the sun" shows a glowing red flush. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-294" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-295" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Hazáṙ" (in Persian, a thousand)=a kind of mocking bird. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-295" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-296" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some <abbr title="Editions">Edit.</abbr> make the doors number a hundred, but the Princesses were forty and these coincidences, which seem to have significance and have none save for Arab symmetromania, are common in Arab stories. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-296" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-297" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Májúr": hence possibly our "mazer," which is popularly derived from Masarn, a maple. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-297" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-298" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A compound scent of ambergris, musk and aloes. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-298" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-299" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The ends of the bridle-reins forming the whip <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-299" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-300" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The flying horse is Pegasus which is a Greek travesty of an Egyptian myth developed in India. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-300" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-301" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Bres. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> wrongly says "the seventh." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-301" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-302" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Sharmutah" (<abbr title="plural">plur.</abbr> Sharámít) from the root Sharmat, to shred, a favourite Egyptian word also applied in vulgar speech to a strumpet, a punk, a piece. It is also the popular term for strips of jerked or boucaned meat hung up in the sun to dry, and classically called "Kadíd." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-302" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-303" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Izár," the man's waist-cloth opposed to the Ridá or shoulder-cloth, is also the sheet of white calico worn by the poorer Egyptian women out of doors and covering head and hands. See Lane (M. E., <abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> i). The rich prefer a "Habárah" of black silk, and the poor, when they have nothing else, use a bed-sheet. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-303" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-304" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> "My dears." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-304" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-305" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Lá tawákhizná:" lit. "do not chastise (or blame) us;" the pop. expression for, "excuse (or pardon) us." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-305" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-306" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Maskhút," mostly applied to change of shape as man enchanted to monkey, and in vulgar parlance applied to a statue (of stone, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>). The list of metamorphoses in Al-Islam is longer than that known to Ovid. Those who have seen Petra, the Greek town of the Haurán and the Roman ruins in Northern Africa will readily detect the basis upon which these stories are built. I shall return to this subject in The City of Iram (Night cclxxvi.) and The City of Brass (dlxvii.). <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-306" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-307" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A picturesque phrase enough to express a deserted site, a spectacle familiar to the Nomades and always abounding in pathos to the citizens. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-307" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-308" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The olden "Harem" (or gynæceum, <abbr title="Persian">Pers.</abbr> Zenanah, Serraglio): Harím is also used by synecdoche for the inmates; especially the wife. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-308" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-309" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The pearl is supposed in the East to lose 1% per <abbr title="annum">ann.</abbr> of its splendour and value. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-309" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-310" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Fass," properly the bezel of a ring; also a gem cut <em><span xml:lang="fr">en cabochon</span></em> and generally the <em><span xml:lang="fr">contenant</span></em> for the <em><span xml:lang="fr">contenu</span></em>. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-310" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-311" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Mihráb"=the arch-headed niche in the Mosque-wall facing Meccah-wards. Here, with his back to the people and fronting the Ka'abah or Square House of Meccah (hence called the "Kiblah"=direction of prayer), stations himself the Imám, antistes or fugleman, lit. "one who stands <em>before</em> others;" and his bows and prostrations give the time to the congregation. I have derived the Mihrab from the niche in which the Egyptian God was shrined: the Jews ignored it, but the Christians preserved it for their statues and altars. Maundrell suggests that the empty niche denotes an invisible God. As the niche (symbol of Venus) and the minaret (symbol of Priapus) date only from the days of the tenth Caliph, Al-Walid (A.H. 86-96=<a id="tn208"/>105-115), the Hindus charge the Moslems with having borrowed the two from their favourite idols—The Linga-Yoni or Cunnus-phallus (Pilgrimage ii. 140), and plainly call the Mihrab a Bhaga=Cunnus (Dabistan ii. 152.) The Guebres further term Meccah "Mah-gah," locus Lunæ, and Al-Medinah, "Mahdinah,"=Moon of religion. See Dabistan i., 49, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-311" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-312" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Kursi," a stool of palm-fronds, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>, ❌-shaped (see Lane's illustration, Nights i., 197), before which the reader sits. Good Moslems will not hold the Holy Volume below the waist nor open it except when ceremonially pure. Englishmen in the East should remember this, for to neglect the "Adab al-Kúran" (respect due to Holy Writ) gives great scandal. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-312" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-313" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mr. Payne (i. 148) quotes the German Zuckerpüppchen. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-313" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-314" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Persian poets have a thousand conceits in praise of the "mole," (Khál or Shámah) for which Hafiz offered "Samarkand and Bokhara" (they not being his, as his friends remarked). Another "topic" is the flight of arrows shot by eyelashes. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-314" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-315" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Suhá" a star in the Great Bear introduced only to balance "wushát"=spies, enviers, enemies, whose "evil eye" it will ward off. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-315" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-316" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Arab tales beauty is always "soft-sided," and a smooth skin is valued in proportion to its rarety. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-316" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-317" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The myrtle is the young hair upon the side-face. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-317" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-318" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In other copies of these verses the fourth couplet swears "by the scorpions of his brow" <em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> the <em><span xml:lang="fr">accroche-cœurs</span></em>, the beau-catchers, bell-ropes or "aggravators," as the B.P. calls them. In couplet eight the poet alludes to his love's "Unsur," or element, his nature made up of the four classicals, and in the last couplet he makes the nail-paring refer to the moon not the sun. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-318" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-319" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is regular formula when speaking of Guebres. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-319" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-320" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Faráiz"; the orders expressly given in the Koran which the reader will remember, is Uncreate and Eternal. In India "Farz" is applied to injunctions thrice repeated; and "Wájib" to those given twice over. Elsewhere scanty difference is made between them. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-320" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-321" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Kufr"=rejecting the True Religion, <em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> Al-Islam, such rejection being "Tughyán" or rebellion against the Lord. The "terrible sound" is taken from the legend of the prophet Sálih and the proto-historic tribe of Thámúd which for its impiety was struck dead by an earthquake and a noise from heaven. The latter, according to some commentators, was the voice of the Archangel Gabriel crying "Die all of you" (Koran, <abbr title="chapters">chapts.</abbr> vii. xviii., <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>). We shall hear more of it in the "City of many-coloured Iram." According to some, Salih, a mysterious Badawi prophet, is buried in the Wady al-Shaykh of the so-called Sinaitic Peninsula. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-321" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-322" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Yet they kept the semblance of man, showing that the idea arose from the basaltic statues found in Hauranic ruins. Mohammed in his various marches to Syria must have seen remnants of Greek and Roman settlements; and as has been noticed "Sesostris" left his mark near Meccah. (Pilgrimage iii. 137). <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-322" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-323" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Shuhadá"; highly respected by Moslems as by other religionists; although their principal if not only merit seems as a rule to have been intense obstinacy and devotion to one idea for which they were ready to sacrifice even life. The Martyrs-category is extensive including those killed by falling walls; victims to the plague, pleurisy and pregnancy; travellers drowned or otherwise lost when journeying honestly, and chaste lovers who die of "broken hearts" <em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> impaired digestion. Their souls are at once stowed away in the crops of green birds where they remain till Resurrection Day, "eating of the fruits and drinking of the streams of Paradise," a place however, whose topography is wholly uncertain. Thus the young Prince was rewarded with a manner of anti-Purgatory, a preparatory heaven. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-323" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-324" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Su 'ubán:" the Badawin give the name to a variety of serpents all held to be venomous; but in tales the word, like "Tannín." expresses our "dragon" or "cockatrice." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-324" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-325" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>She was ashamed to see the lady doing servile duty by rubbing her feet. This <em>massage</em>, which B. de la Brocquière describes in 1452 as "kneading and pinching," has already been noticed. The French term is apparently derived from the <abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Mas-h." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-325" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-326" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alluding to the Most High Name, the hundredth name of God, the Heb. Shem hamphorash, unknown save to a favoured few who by using it perform all manner of miracles. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-326" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-327" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> the Mediterranean and the Indian Ocean. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-327" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-328" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> Settled by the Koran. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-328" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-329" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The uglier the old woman the better procuress she is supposed to make. See the Santa Verdiana in Boccaccio v., 10. In <abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Ajuz" (old woman) is highly insulting and if addressed to an Egyptian, whatever be her age she will turn fiercely and resent it. The polite term is Shaybah (Pilgrimage iii., 200). <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-329" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-330" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The four ages of woman, considered after Demosthenes in her three-fold character, prostitute for pleasure, concubine for service and wife for breeding. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-330" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-331" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Jilá" (the Hindostani Julwa)=the displaying of the bride before the bridegroom for the first time, in different dresses, to the number of seven which are often borrowed for the occasion. The happy man must pay a fee called "the tax of face-unveiling" before he can see her features. Amongst Syrian Christians he sometimes tries to lift the veil by a sharp movement of the sword which is parried by the women present, and the blade remains entangled in the cloth. At last he succeeds, the bride sinks to the ground covering her face with her hands and the robes of her friends: presently she is raised up, her veil is readjusted and her face is left bare. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-331" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-332" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Ishá"=the first watch of the night, twilight, supper-time, supper. Moslems have borrowed the four watches of the Romans from 6 (<abbr title="ante meridiem">a.m.</abbr> or <abbr title="post meridiem">p.m.</abbr>) to 6; and ignore the three original watches of the Jews, even, midnight and cockcrow (Sam. ii. 19, Judges vii. 19, and Exodus xiv. 24). <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-332" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-333" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A popular Arab hyperbole. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-333" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-334" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Shakáik al-Nu'umán," lit. the fissures of Nu'uman, the beautiful anemone, which a tyrannical King of Hirah, Nu'uman ibn Al-Munzir, a contemporary of Mohammed, attempted to monopolize. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-334" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-335" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Andam"=here the gum called dragon's blood; in other places the dye-wood known as brazil. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-335" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-336" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I need hardly say that in the East, where bells are unused, clapping the hands summons the servants. In India men cry "Quy hye" (Koi hái?) and in the Brazil whistle "Pst!" after the fashion of Spain and Portugal. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-336" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-337" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The moles are here compared with pearls; a simile by no means common or appropriate. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-337" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-338" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A parody on the testification of Allah's Unity. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-338" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-339" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Simát" (prop. "Sumát"); the "dinner-table," composed of a round wooden stool supporting a large metal tray, the two being called "Sufrah" (or "Simat"): thus, "Sufrah házirah!" means dinner is on the table. After the meal they are at once removed. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-339" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-340" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the text "Dastúr," the Persian word before noticed; "Izn" would be the proper Arabic equivalent. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-340" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-341" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the Moslem East a young woman, single or married, is not allowed to appear alone in the streets; and the police has a right to arrest delinquents. As a preventive of intrigues the precaution is excellent. During the Crimean war hundreds of officers, English, French and Italian, became familiar with Constantinople; and not a few flattered themselves on their success with Turkish women. I do not believe that a single <em><span xml:lang="la">bonâ fide</span></em> case occurred; the "conquests" were all Greeks, Wallachians, Armenians or Jewesses. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-341" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-342" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Azím": translators do not seem to know that this word in The Nights often bears its Egyptian and slang sense, somewhat equivalent to our "deuced" or "mighty" or "awfully fine." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-342" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-343" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is a very serious thing amongst Moslems and scrupulous men often make great sacrifices to avoid taking an oath. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-343" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-344" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>We should say "into the noose." <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-344" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-345" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The man had fallen in love with her and determined to mark her so that she might be his. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-345" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-346" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Dajlah," in which we find the Heb. Hid-dekel. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-346" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-347" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Such an execution would be contrary to Moslem law: but people would look leniently upon the peccadillo of beheading or sacking a faithless wife. Moreover the youth was of the blood royal and <em><span xml:lang="fr">A quoi bon être prince?</span></em> as was said by a boy of viceroyal family in Egypt to his tutor who reproached him for unnecessarily shooting down a poor old man. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-347" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-348" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Shirk," partnership, evening or associating gods with God; polytheism: especially levelled at the Hindu triadism, Guebre dualism and Christian Trinitarianism. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-348" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-349" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Shatm"=abuse, generally couched in foulest language with especial reference to the privy parts of female relatives. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-349" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-350" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>When a woman is bastinadoed in the East they leave her some portion of dress and pour over her sundry buckets of water for a delicate consideration. When the hands are beaten they are passed through holes in the curtain separating the sufferer from mankind, and made fast to a "falakah" or pole. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-350" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-351" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Khalifah," Caliph. The word is also used for the successor of a Santon or holy man. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-351" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-352" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Sár;" here the Koranic word for carrying out the venerable and undying <em><span xml:lang="la">lex talionis</span></em>, the original basis of all criminal jurisprudence. Its main fault is that justice repeats the offence. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-352" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-353" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Both these sons of Harun became Caliphs, as we shall see in The Nights. <a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-353" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-354" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Dog" and "hog" are still highly popular terms of abuse. The Rabbis will not defile their lips with "pig;" but say "Dabhar akhir"="another thing." <a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-354" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-355" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The "hero eponymus" of the Abbaside dynasty, Abbas having been the brother of Abdullah, the father of Mohammed. He is a famous personage in Al-Islam (D'Herbelot). <a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-355" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-356" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Europe translates the word "Barmecides." It is Persian from <em>bar</em> (up) and <em>makídan</em> (to suck). The vulgar legend is that Ja'afar, the first of the name, appeared before the Caliph Abd al-Malik with a ring poisoned for his own need; and that the Caliph, warned of it by the clapping of two stones which he wore <em><span xml:lang="la">ad hoc</span></em>, charged the visitor with intention to murder him. He excused himself and in his speech occurred the Persian word "Barmakam," which may mean "I shall sup it up," or, "I am a Barmak," that is, a high priest among the Guebres. See D'Herbelot <abbr title="sub verbo">s.v.</abbr> <a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-356" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-357" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Zulm," the deadliest of monarch's sins. One of the sayings of Mohammed, popularly quoted, is, "Kingdom endureth with Kufr or infidelity (<em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> without accepting Al-Islam) but endureth not with Zulm or injustice." Hence the good Moslem will not complain of the rule of Kafirs or Unbelievers, like the English, so long as they rule him righteously and according to his own law. <a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-357" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-358" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>All this aggravates his crime: had she been a widow she would not have had upon him "the claims of maidenhead," the premio della verginità of Boccaccio, x. 10. <a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-358" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-359" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is supposed that slaves cannot help telling these fatal lies. Arab story-books are full of ancient and modern instances and some have become "Joe Millers." Moreover it is held unworthy of a freeborn man to take over-notice of these servile villanies; hence the scoundrel in the story escapes unpunished. I have already noticed the predilection of debauched women for these "skunks of the human race;" and the young man in the text evidently suspected that his wife had passed herself this "little caprice." The excuse which the Caliph would find for him is the <em>pundonor</em> shown in killing one he loved so fondly. <a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-359" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-360" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Arab equivalent of our pitcher and well. <a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-360" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-361" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> Where the dress sits loosely about the bust. <a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-361" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-362" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He had trusted in Allah and his trust was justified. <a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-362" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-363" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Khila'ah" prop. what a man strips from his person: gen. an honorary gift. It is something more than the "robe of honour" of our chivalrous romances, as it includes a horse, a sword (often gold-hilted), a black turban (amongst the Abbasides) embroidered with gold, a violet-coloured mantle, a waist-shawl and a gold neck-chain and shoe-buckles. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-363" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-364" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Izá," <em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> the visits of condolence and so forth which are long and terribly wearisome in the Moslem East. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-364" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-365" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Mahr," the money settled by the man before marriage on the woman and without which the contract is not valid. Usually half of it is paid down on the marriage-day and the other half when the husband dies or divorces his wife. But if she take a divorce she forfeits her right to it, and obscene fellows, especially Persians, often compel her to demand divorce by unnatural and preposterous use of her person. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-365" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-366" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bismillah here means "Thou art welcome to it." <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-366" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-367" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Bassak," half <abbr title="Persian">Pers.</abbr> (bas=enough) and—ak=thou; for thee. "Bas" sounds like our "buss" (to kiss) and there are sundry good old Anglo-Indian jokes of feminine mistakes on the subject. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-367" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-368" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This saving clause makes the threat worse. The scene between the two brothers is written with characteristic Arab humour; and it is true to nature. In England we have heard of a man who separated from his wife because he wished to dine at six and she preferred half-past six. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-368" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-369" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Misr" (vulg. Masr). The word, which comes of a very ancient house, was applied to the present Capital about the time of its conquest by the Osmanli Turks A.H. 923=1517. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-369" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-370" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Jízah,"=skirt, edge; the modern village is the site of an ancient Egyptian city, as the "Ghizah inscription" proves (Brugsch, History of Egypt, ii. 415). <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-370" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-371" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Watan" literally meaning "birth-place" but also used for "patria, native country"; thus "Hubb al-Watan"=patriotism. The Turks pronounce it "Vatan," which the French have turned into Va-t'en! <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-371" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-372" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Zarzariyah"=the colour of a stare or starling (Zurzúr). <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-372" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-373" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Now a Railway Station on the Alexandria-Cairo line. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-373" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-374" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Even as late as 1852, when I first saw Cairo, the city was girt by waste lands and the climate was excellent. Now cultivation comes up to the house walls; while the Mahmudiyah Canal, the planting the streets with avenues and over-watering have seriously injured it; those who want the air of former Cairo must go to Thebes. Gout, rheumatism and hydrophobia (before unknown) have become common of late years. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-374" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-375" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is the popular pronunciation: Yákút calls it "Bilbís." <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-375" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-376" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An outlying village on the "Long Desert," between Cairo and Palestine. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-376" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-377" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Al-Kuds"=holiness. There are few cities which in our day have less claim to this title than Jerusalem; and, curious to say, the "Holy Land" shows Jews, Christians and Moslems all in their worst form. The only religion (if it can be called one) which produces men in Syria is the Druse. "Heiligen-landes Jüden" are proverbial and nothing can be meaner than the Christians while the Moslems are famed for treachery. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-377" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-378" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Shamm al-hawá." In vulgar parlance to "smell the air" is to take a walk especially out of town. There is a peculiar Egyptian festival called "Shamm al-Nasím" (smelling the Zephyr) which begins on Easter-Monday (O.S.), thus corresponding with the Persian Nau-roz, vernal equinox and introducing the fifty days of "Khammasín" or "Mirisi" (hot desert winds). On awaking, the people smell and bathe their temples with vinegar in which an onion has been soaked and break their fast with a "fisikh" or dried "búri"=mullet from Lake Menzalah: the late Hekekiyan Bey had the fish-heads counted in one public garden and found 70,000. The rest of the day is spent out of doors "Gypsying," and families greatly enjoy themselves on these occasions. For a longer description see a paper by my excellent friend Yacoub Artin Pasha, in the Bulletin de l'Institut Égyptien, 2nd series, No. 4, Cairo, 1884. I have noticed the Mirisi (Southwester) and other winds in the Land of Midian, i., 23. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-378" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-379" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>So in the days of the "Mameluke Beys" in Egypt a man of rank would not cross the street on foot. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-379" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-380" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> Basrah. The city now in decay and not to flourish again till the advent of the Euphrates Valley R.R., is a modern place, founded in A.H. 15, by the Caliph Omar upon the Aylah, a feeder of the Tigris. Here, according to Al-Hariri, the "whales and the lizards meet;" and, as the tide affects the river,</p>
					<div class="nf-center-c1">
						<div class="c021 nf-center">
							<div>Its stream shows prodigy, ebbing and flowing.</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>In its far-famed market-place, Al-Marbad, poems used to be recited; and the city was famous for its mosques and Saint-shrines, fair women and school of Grammar which rivalled that of Kúfah. But already in Al-Hariri's day (nat. A.H. 446=A.D. 1030) Baghdad had drawn off much of its population. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-380" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-381" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This fumigation (Bukhúr) is still used. A little incense or perfumed wood is burnt upon an open censer (Mibkharah) of earthenware or metal, and passed round, each guest holding it for a few moments under his beard. In the Somali Country, the very home of incense, both sexes fumigate the whole person after carnal intercourse. Lane (Mod. Egypt, <abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> viii.) gives an illustration of the Mibkharah. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-381" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-382" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The reader of The Nights will remark that the merchant is often a merchant-prince, consorting and mating with the highest dignitaries. Even amongst the Romans, a race of soldiers, statesmen and lawyers, "mercatura" on a large scale was "not to be vituperated." In Boccaccio (x. 19) they are netti e delicati uomini. England is perhaps the only country which has made her fortune by trade, and much of it illicit trade, like that in slaves which built Liverpool and Bristol, and which yet disdains or affects to disdain the trader. But the unworthy prejudice is disappearing with the last generation, and men who formerly would have half starved as curates and ensigns, barristers and <em><span xml:lang="fr">carabins</span></em> are now only too glad to become merchants. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-382" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-383" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These lines in the Calc. and Bul. <abbr title="Editions">Edit.</abbr> have already occurred (Night vii.) but such carelessness is characteristic despite the proverb, "In repetition is no fruition." I quote Torrens (p. 60) by way of variety. As regards the anemone (here called a tulip) being named "Shakík"=fissure, I would conjecture that it derives from the flower often forming long lines of red like stripes of blood in the landscape. Travellers in Syria always observe this. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-383" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-384" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Such an address to a royalty (Eastern) even in the present day, would be a passport to future favours. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-384" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-385" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In England the man marries and the woman is married: there is no such distinction in Arabia. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-385" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-386" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Sultan" (and its corruption "Soldan") etymologically means lord, victorious, ruler, ruling over. In Arabia it is a not uncommon proper name; and as a title it is taken by a host of petty kinglets. The Abbaside Caliphs (as Al-Wásik who has been noticed) formally created these Sultans as their regents. Al-Tá'i bi'llah (regn. A.H. 363=974), invested the famous Sabuktagin with the office; and, as Alexander-Sikandar was wont to do, fastened for him two flags, one of silver, after the fashion of nobles, and the other of gold, as Viceroy-designate. Sabuktagin's son, the famous Mahmúd of the Ghaznavite dynasty in A.H. 393=1002, was the first to adopt "Sultan" as an independent title some two hundred years after the death of Harun al-Rashid. In old writers we have the Soldan of Egypt, the Soudan of Persia, and the Sowdan of Babylon; three modifications of one word. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-386" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-387" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> he was a "Háfiz," one who commits to memory the whole of the Koran. It is a serious task and must be begun early. I learnt by rote the last "Juzw" (or thirtieth part) and found that quite enough. This is the vulgar use of "Hafiz": technically and theologically it means the third order of Traditionists (the total being five) who know by heart 300,000 traditions of the Prophet with their ascriptions. A curious "spiritualist" book calls itself "Hafed, Prince of Persia," proving by the very title that the Spirits are equally ignorant of Arabic and Persian. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-387" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-388" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here again the Cairo <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> repeats the six couplets already given in Night xvii. I take them from Torrens (p. 163). <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-388" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-389" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This naïve admiration of beauty in either sex characterised our chivalrous times. Now it is mostly confined to "professional beauties" of what is conventionally called the "fair sex"; as if there could be any comparison between the beauty of man and the beauty of woman, the Apollo Belvidere with the Venus de Medici. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-389" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-390" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Shásh" (in <abbr title="Persian">Pers.</abbr> urine), a light turband generally of muslin. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-390" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-391" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is a <em><span xml:lang="fr">lieu commun</span></em> of Eastern worldly wisdom. Quite true! Very unadvisable to dive below the surface of one's acquaintances, but such intimacy is like marriage of which Johnson said, "Without it there is no pleasure in life." <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-391" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-392" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The lines are attributed to the famous Al-Mutanabbi=the claimant to "Prophecy," of whom I have given a few details in my Pilgrimage (iii. 60, 62). He led the life of a true poet, somewhat Chauvinistic withal; and, rather than run away, was killed in A.H. 354=965. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-392" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-393" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Nabíz"=wine of raisins or dates; any fermented liquor; from a root to "press out" in Syriac, like the word "Talmiz" (or Tilmiz, says the Kashf al-Ghurrah) a pupil, student. Date-wine (fermented from the fruit, not the Tádi, or juice of the stem, our "toddy") is called Fazikh. Hence the Masjid al-Fazikh at Al-Medinah where the Ansar or Auxiliaries of that city were sitting cup in hand when they heard of the revelation forbidding inebriants and poured the liquor upon the ground (Pilgrimage ii. 322). <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-393" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-394" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Huda"=direction (to the right way), salvation, a word occurring in the Opening Chapter of the Koran. Hence to a Kafir who offers the Salam-salutation many Moslems reply "Allah yahdík"=Allah direct thee! (<em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> make thee a Moslem), instead of Allah yusallimak=Allah lead thee to salvation. It is the root word of the Mahdi and Mohdi. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-394" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-395" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These lines have already occurred in The First Kalandar's Story (Night xi). I quote by way of change and with permission Mr. Payne's version (i. 93). <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-395" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-396" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Farajíyah," a long-sleeved robe worn by the learned (Lane, M. E., <abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> i.) <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-396" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-397" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Sarráf" (vulg. Sayrafi), whence the Anglo-Indian "Shroff," a familiar corruption. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-397" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-398" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Yahúdí" which is less polite than "Banú Isráíl"=Children of Israel. So in Christendom "Israelite" when in favour and "Jew" (with an adjective or a participle) when nothing is wanted of him. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-398" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-399" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Also called "Ghilmán"=the beautiful youths appointed to serve the True Believers in Paradise. The Koran says (<abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> lvi. 9 <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>) "Youths, which shall continue in their bloom for ever, shall go round about to attend them, with goblets, and beakers, and a cup of flowing wine," <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> Mohammed was an Arab (not a Persian, a born pederast) and he was too fond of women to be charged with love of boys: even Tristram Shandy (<abbr title="volume">vol.</abbr> vii. <abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> 7; "No, quoth a third; the gentleman has been committing——") knew that the two tastes are incompatibles. But this and other passages in the Koran have given the Chevaliers de la Paille a hint that the use of boys, like that of wine, here forbidden, will be permitted in Paradise. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-399" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-400" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Which, by the by, is the age of an oldish old maid in Egypt. I much doubt puberty being there earlier than in England where our grandmothers married at fourteen. But Orientals are aware that the period of especial feminine devilry is between the first menstruation and twenty when, according to some, every girl is a "possible murderess." So they wisely marry her and get rid of what is called the "lump of grief," the "domestic calamity"—a daughter. Amongst them we never hear of the abominable egotism and cruelty of the English mother, who disappoints her daughter's womanly cravings in order to keep her at home for her own comfort; and an "old maid" in the house, especially a stout, plump old maid, is considered not "respectable." The ancient virgin is known by being lean and scraggy; and perhaps this diagnosis is correct. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-400" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-401" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This prognostication of destiny by the stars and a host of follies that end in-mancy is. an intricate and extensive subject. Those who would study it are referred to <abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> xiv. of the "Qanoon-e-Islam, or the Customs of the Mussulmans of India; <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>, by Jaffur Shurreeff and translated by G. A. Herklots, M.D. of Madras." This excellent work first appeared in 1832 (Allen and Co., London) and thus it showed the way to Lane's "Modern Egyptians" (1833-35). The name was unfortunate as "Kuzzilbash" (which rhymed to guzzle and hash), and kept the book back till a second edition appeared in 1863 (Madras: J. Higginbotham). <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-401" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-402" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Bárid," lit. cold: metaph. vain, foolish, insipid. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-402" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-403" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Not to "spite thee" but "in spite of thee." The phrase is still used by high and low. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-403" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-404" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Ahdab," the common hunchback: in classical language the Gobbo in the text would be termed "Ak'as" from "Ka'as," one with protruding back and breast; sometimes used for hollow back and protruding breast. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-404" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-405" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is the custom with such gentry, who, when they see a likely man sitting, are allowed by custom to ride astraddle upon his knees with most suggestive movements, till he buys them off. These Ghawází are mostly Gypsies who pretend to be Moslems; and they have been confused with the Almahs or Moslem dancing-girls proper (Awálim, <abbr title="plural">plur.</abbr> of Alimah, a learned feminine) by a host of travellers. They call themselves Barámikah or Barmecides only to affect Persian origin. Under native rule they were perpetually being banished from and returning to Cairo (Pilgrimage i., 202). Lane (M. E., chapts. xviii. and xix.) discusses the subject, and would derive Al'mah, often so pronounced, from Heb. Almah, girl, virgin, singing girl, hence he would translate Al-Alamoth shir (Psalm xlvi.) and Nebalim al-alamoth (1 Chron., xv. 20) by a "song for singing-girls" and "harps for singing-girls." He quotes also St. Jerome as authority that Alma in Punic (Phœnician) signified a virgin, not a common article, I may observe, amongst singing-girls. I shall notice in a future page Burckhardt's description of the Ghawazi, p. 173, "Arabic Proverbs;" <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> Second Edition. London: Quaritch, 1875. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-405" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-406" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I need hardly describe the Tarbúsh, a corruption of the <abbr title="Persian">Pers.</abbr> "Sar-púsh" (head-cover) also called "Fez," from its old home; and "Tarbrush" by the travelling Briton. In old days it was a calotte worn under the turban; and it was protected from scalp-perspiration by an "Arakiyah" (<abbr title="Persian">Pers.</abbr> Arak-chín), a white skull-cap. Now it is worn without either and as a head-dress nothing can be worse (Pilgrimage ii. 275.) <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-406" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-407" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Tár.": the custom still prevails. Lane (M. E., <abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> xviii.) describes and figures this hoop-drum. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-407" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-408" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The couch on which she sits while being displayed. It is her throne, for she is the Queen of the occasion, with all the Majesty of Virginity. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-408" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-409" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is a solemn "chaff;" such liberties being permitted at weddings and festive occasions. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-409" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-410" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The pre-Islamític dynasty of Al-Yaman in Arabia Felix, a region formerly famed for wealth and luxury. Hence the mention of Yamani work. The caravans from Sana'á, the capital, used to carry patterns of vases to be made in China and bring back the porcelains at the end of the third year: these are the Arabic inscriptions which have puzzled so many collectors. The Tobba, or Successors, were the old Himyarite Kings, a dynastic name like Pharaoh, Kisra (Persia), Negush (Abyssinia), Khakan or Khan (Tartary), <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>, who claimed to have extended their conquests to Samarcand and made war on China. Any history of Arabia (as Crichton I., chapt iv.) may be consulted for their names and annals. I have been told by Arabs that "Tobba" (or Tubba) is still used in the old Himyar-land=the Great or the Chief. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-410" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-411" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lane and Payne (as well as the Bres. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr>) both render the word "to kiss her," but this would be clean contrary to Moslem usage. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-411" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-412" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> he was full of rage which he concealed. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-412" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-413" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Hindus (as the Katha shows) compare this swimming gait with an elephant's roll. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-413" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-414" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Fitnah," a word almost as troublesome as "Adab." Primarily, revolt seduction, mischief: then a beautiful girl (or boy), and lastly a certain aphrodisiac perfume extracted from mimosa-flowers (Pilgrimage i., 118). <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-414" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-415" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lit. burst the "gall-bladder:" In this and in the "liver" allusions I dare not be baldly literal. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-415" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-416" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Usfur" the seeds of Carthamus tinctorius=Safflower (Forskål, Flora, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> lv.). The seeds are crushed for oil and the flowers, which must be gathered by virgins or the colour will fail, are extensively used for dyeing in Southern Arabia and Eastern Africa. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-416" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-417" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On such occasions Miss Modesty shuts her eyes and looks as if about to faint. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-417" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-418" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>After either evacuation the Moslem is bound to wash or sand the part; first however he should apply three pebbles, or potsherds or clods of earth. Hence the allusion in the Koran (<abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> ix.), "men who love to be purified." When the Prophet was questioning the men of Kuba, where he founded a mosque (Pilgrimage ii., 215), he asked them about their legal ablutions, especially after evacuation; and they told him that they used three stones before washing. Moslems and Hindus (who prefer water mixed with earth) abhor the unclean and unhealthy use of paper without ablution; and the people of India call Europeans draught-houses, by way of opprobrium, "Kághaz-khánah"=paper closets. Most old Anglo-Indians, however, learn to use water. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-418" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-419" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Miao" or "Mau" is the generic name of the cat in the Egyptian of the hieroglyphs. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-419" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-420" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Ya Mash'úm" addressed to an evil spirit. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-420" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-421" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Heehaw!" as we should say. The Bresl. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> makes the cat cry "Nauh! Nauh!" and the ass-colt "Manu! Manu!" I leave these onomatopoeics as they are in Arabic; they are curious, showing the unity in variety of hearing inarticulate sounds. The bird which is called "Whip poor Will" in the U.S., is known to the Brazilians as "<span xml:lang="pt">Joam corta páo</span>" (John cut wood); so differently do they hear the same notes. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-421" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-422" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is usually a slab of marble with a long slit in front and a round hole behind. The text speaks of a Kursi (=stool); but this is now unknown to native houses which have not adopted European fashions. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-422" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-423" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This again is chaff as she addresses the Hunchback. The Bul. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> has "O Abu Shiháb" (Father of the shooting-star=evil spirit); the Bresl. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> "O son of a heap! O son of a Something!" (al-Aísh, a vulgarism). <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-423" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-424" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As the reader will see, Arab ideas of "fun" and practical jokes are of the largest, putting the Hibernian to utter rout, and comparing favourably with those recorded in Don Quixote. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-424" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-425" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Saráwil" a corruption of the <abbr title="Persian">Pers.</abbr> "Sharwál"; popularly called "libás" which, however, may also mean clothing in general and especially outer-clothing. I translate "bag-trousers" and "petticoat-trousers," the latter being the divided skirt of our future. In the East, where Common Sense, not Fashion, rules dress, men, who have a protuberance to be concealed, wear petticoats and women wear trousers. The feminine article is mostly baggy but sometimes, as in India, <em><span xml:lang="fr">collant</span></em>-tight. A quasi-sacred part of it is the inkle, tape or string, often a most magnificent affair, with tassels of pearl and precious stones; and "laxity in the trouser-string" is equivalent to the loosest conduct. Upon the subject of "libás," "sarwál" and its variants the curious reader will consult Dr. Dozy's "<span xml:lang="fr">Dictionnaire Détaillé des Noms des Vêtements chez les Arabes</span>," a most valuable work. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-425" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-426" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The turban out of respect is not put upon the ground (Lane, M. E., <abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> i.). <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-426" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-427" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Madfa'" showing the modern date or the modernization of the tale. In Lebid "Madáfi'" (<abbr title="plural">plur.</abbr> of Madfa') means water-courses or leats. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-427" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-428" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Arab, the "he" is a "she;" and Habíb ("friend") is the Attic <span xml:lang="el">φίλος</span>, a euphemism for lover. This will occur throughout The Nights. So the Arabs use a phrase corresponding with the Stoic <span xml:lang="el">φιλε~ι</span> <em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> is wont, is fain. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-428" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-429" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Part of the Azán, or call to prayer. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-429" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-430" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Shiháb," these meteors being the flying shafts shot at evil spirits who approach too near Heaven. The idea doubtless arose from the showers of August and November meteors (The Perseides and Taurides) which suggest a battle raging in upper air. Christendom also has its superstition concerning them and called those of August the "fiery tears of Saint Lawrence," whose festival was on August 10. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-430" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-431" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Tákiyah"=<abbr title="Persian">Pers.</abbr> Arak-chin; the calotte worn under the Fez. It is, I have said, now obsolete and the red woollen cap (mostly made in Europe) is worn over the hair; an unclean practice. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-431" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-432" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Often the effect of cold air after a heated room. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-432" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-433" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> He was not a Eunuch, as the people guessed. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-433" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-434" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Arab, "this night" for the reason before given. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-434" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-435" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Meaning especially the drink prepared of the young leaves and florets of Cannabis Sativa. The word literally means "dry grass" or "herbage." This intoxicant was much used by magicians to produce ecstacy and thus to "deify themselves and receive the homage of the genii and spirits of nature." <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-435" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-436" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Torrens, being an Irishman, translates "and woke in the morning sleeping at Damascus." <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-436" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-437" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Labbayka," the cry technically called "Talbiyah" and used by those entering Meccah (Pilgrimage iii. 125-232). I shall also translate it by "Adsum." The full cry is:—</p>
					<div class="c016 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">Here am I, O Allah, here am I!</div>
								<div class="line">No partner hast Thou, here am I:</div>
								<div class="line">Verily the praise and the grace and the kingdom are thine:</div>
								<div class="line">No partner hast Thou: here am I!</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>A single Talbiyah is a "Shart" or positive condition: and its repetition is a Sunnat or Custom of the Prophet. See Night xci. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-437" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-438" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The staple abuse of the vulgar is cursing parents and relatives, especially feminine, with specific allusions to their "shame." And when dames of high degree are angry, Nature, in the East as in the West, sometimes speaks out clearly enough, despite Mistress Chapone and all artificial restrictions. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-438" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-439" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A great beauty in Arabia and the reverse in Denmark, Germany and Slav-land, where it is a sign of being a were-wolf or a vampire. In Greece also it denotes a "Brukolak" or vampire. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-439" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-440" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is not physiologically true: a bride rarely conceives the first night, and certainly would not know that she had conceived. Moreover the number of courses furnished by the bridegroom would be against conception. It is popularly said that a young couple often undoes in the morning what it has done during the night. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-440" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-441" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Torrens (Notes, xxiv.) quotes "Fleisher" upon the word "Ghamghama" (Diss. Crit. de Glossis Habichtionis), which he compares with "Dumduma" and "Humbuma" determining them to be onomatopoeics, "an incomplete and an obscure murmur of a sentence as it were lingering between the teeth and lips and therefore difficult to be understood." Of this family is "Taghúm"; not used in modern days. In my Pilgrimage (i. 313) I have noticed another, "Khyas, Khyas!" occurring in a Hizb al-Bahr (Spell of the Sea). Herklots gives a host of them; and their sole characteristics are harshness and strangeness of sound, uniting consonants which are not joined in Arabic. The old Egyptians and Chaldeans had many such words composed at will for theurgic operations. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-441" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-442" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This may mean either "it is of Mosul fashion" or, it is of muslin. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-442" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-443" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>To the English reader these lines would appear the reverse of apposite; but Orientals have their own ways of application, and all allusions to Badawi partings are effective and affecting. The civilised poets of Arab cities throw the charm of the Desert over their verse by images borrowed from its scenery, the dromedary, the mirage and the well, as naturally as certain of our bards who hated the country, babbled of purling rills, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> Thoroughly to feel Arabic poetry one must know the Desert (Pilgrimage iii., 63). <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-443" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-444" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In those days the Arabs and the Portuguese recorded everything which struck them, as the Chinese and Japanese do in our times. And yet we complain of the amount of our modern writing! <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-444" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-445" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is mentioned because it is the act preliminary to naming the babe. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-445" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-446" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Kahramánát" from Kahramán, an old Persian hero who conversed with the Simurgh-Griffon. Usually the word is applied to women-at-arms who defend the Harem, like the Urdu-begani of India, whose services were lately offered to England (1885), or the "Amazons" of Dahome. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-446" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-447" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Meaning he grew as fast in one day as other children in a month. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-447" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-448" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> Al-Aríf; the tutor, the assistant-master. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-448" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-449" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Ibn harám," a common term of abuse; and not a factual reflection on the parent. I have heard a mother apply the term to her own son. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-449" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-450" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Khanjar" from the Persian, a syn. with the <abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Jambiyah." It is noticed in my Pilgrimage iii., pp. 72, 75. To "silver the dagger," means to become a rich man. From "Khanjar," not from its fringed loop or strap, I derive our silly word "hanger." Dr. Steingass would connect it with Germ. Fänger, <em><abbr title="exempli gratia">e.g.</abbr></em>, Hirschfänger. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-450" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-451" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Again we have "Dastur" for "Izn." <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-451" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-452" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Iklím"; the seven climates of Ptolemy. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-452" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-453" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Al-Ghadir," lit. a place where water sinks, a lowland: here the drainage-lakes east of Damascus into which the Baradah (Abana?) discharges. The higher eastern plain is "Al-Ghutah" before noticed. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-453" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-454" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The "Plain of Pebbles" still so termed at Damascus; an open space west of the city. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-454" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-455" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Every Guide-book, even the Reverend Porter's "Murray," gives a long account of this Christian Church 'verted to a Mosque. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-455" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-456" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Nabút"; Pilgrimage i. 336. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-456" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-457" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Bres. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> says, "would have knocked him into Al-Yaman" (Southern Arabia) something like our slang phrase "into the middle of next week." <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-457" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-458" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Khádim": lit. a servant, politely applied (like Aghá=master) to a castrato. These gentry wax furious if baldly called "Tawáshi"=Eunuch. A mauvais plaisant in Egypt used to call me The Agha because a friend had placed his wife under my charge. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-458" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-459" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This sounds absurd enough in English, but Easterns always put themselves first for respect. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-459" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-460" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Arabic the World is feminine. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-460" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-461" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Sáhib"=lit. a companion; also a friend and especially applied to the Companions of Mohammed. Hence the Sunnis claim for them the honour of "friendship" with the Apostle; but the Shia'hs reply that the Arab says "Sahaba-hu'l-himár" (the Ass was his Sahib or companion). In the text it is a Wazirial title, in modern India it is=gentleman, <em><abbr title="exempli gratia">e.g.</abbr></em> "Sahib log" (the Sahib people) means their white conquerors, who, by the by, mostly mispronounce the word "Sáb." <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-461" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-462" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Suwán," prop. Syenite, from Syene (Al-Suwan) but applied to flint and any hard stone. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-462" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-463" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It was famous in the middle ages, and even now it is, perhaps, the most interesting to travellers after that "Sentina Gentium," the "Bhendi Bazar" of unromantic Bombay. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-463" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-464" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"The Gate of the Gardens," in the northern wall, a Roman archway of the usual solid construction shaming not only our modern shams, but our finest masonry. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-464" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-465" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Al-Asr," which may mean either the hour or the prayer. It is also the moment at which the Guardian Angels relieve each other (Sale's Koran, <abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> v.). <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-465" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-466" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Ya házá"=O this (one)! a somewhat slighting address equivalent to "Heus tu! O thou, whoever thou art." Another form is "Yá hú"=O he! Can this have originated Swift's "Yahoo?" <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-466" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-467" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alluding to the <span xml:lang="el">τήρατα</span> ("minor miracles which cause surprise") performed by Saints' tombs, the mildest form of thaumaturgy. One of them gravely recorded in the Dabistan (ii. 226) is that of the holy Jamen, who opened the Sámran or bead-bracelet from the arm of the beautiful Chistápá with member erect, "thus evincing his manly strength and his command over himself"(!) <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-467" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-468" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The River of Paradise, a <em><span xml:lang="fr">lieu commun</span></em> of poets (Koran, <abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> cviii.): the water is whiter than milk or silver, sweeter than honey, smoother than cream, more odorous than musk; its banks are of chrysolite and it is drunk out of silver cups set around it thick as stars. Two pipes conduct it to the Prophet's Pond which is an exact square, one month's journey in compass. Kausar is spirituous like wine; Salsabil sweet like clarified honey; the Fount of Mildness is like milk and the Fount of Mercy like liquid crystal. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-468" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-469" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Moslem does not use the European basin because water which has touched an impure skin becomes impure. Hence it is poured out from a ewer ("ibrík" <abbr title="Persian">Pers.</abbr> Abríz) upon the hands and falls into a basin ("tisht") with an open-worked cover. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-469" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-470" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Wahsh," a word of many meanings; nasty, insipid, savage, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> The offside of a horse is called Wahshi opposed to Insi, the near side. The Amir Taymur ("Lord Iron") whom Europeans unwittingly call after his Persian enemies' nickname, "Tamerlane," <em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> Taymur-i-lang, or limping Taymur, is still known as "Al-Wahsh" (the wild beast) at Damascus, where his Tartars used to bury men up to their necks and play at bowls with their heads for ninepins. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-470" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-471" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For "grandson" as being more affectionate. Easterns have not yet learned that clever Western saying:—The enemies of our enemies are our friends. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-471" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-472" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This was a simple bastinado on the back, not the more ceremonious affair of beating the feet-soles. But it is surprising what the Egyptians can bear; some of the rods used in the time of the Mameluke Beys are nearly as thick as a man's wrist. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-472" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-473" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The woman-like spite of the eunuch intended to hurt the grandmother's feelings. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-473" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-474" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The usual Cairene "chaff." <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-474" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-475" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A necessary precaution against poison (Pilgrimage i. 84, and iii. 43). <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-475" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-476" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Bresl. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> (ii. 108) describes the scene at greater length. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-476" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-477" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Bul. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> gives by mistake of diacritical points, "Zabdaniyah:" Raydaniyah is or rather was a camping ground to the North of Cairo. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-477" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-478" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "La'abat"=a plaything, a puppet, a lay figure. Lane (i. 326) conjectures that the cross is so called because it resembles a man with arms extended. But Moslems never heard of the fanciful ideas of mediæval Christian divines who saw the cross everywhere and in everything. The former hold that Pharaoh invented the painful and ignominious punishment. (Koran, <abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> vii.) <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-478" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-479" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here good blood, driven to bay, speaks out boldly. But, as a rule the humblest and mildest Eastern when in despair turns round upon his oppressors like a wild cat. Some of the criminals whom Fath Ali Shah of Persia put to death by chopping down the fork, beginning at the scrotum, abused his mother till the knife reached their vitals and they could no longer speak. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-479" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-480" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These repeated "laughs" prove the trouble of his spirit. Noble Arabs "show their back-teeth" so rarely that their laughter is held worthy of being recorded by their biographers. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-480" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-481" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A popular phrase, derived from the Koranic "Truth is come, and falsehood is vanished: for falsehood is of short continuance" (<abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> xvii.). It is an equivalent of our adaptation from 1 Esdras iv. 41, "Magna est veritas et prævalebit." But the great question still remains, What is Truth? <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-481" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-482" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Night lxxv. these lines will occur with variants. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-482" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-483" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is always mentioned: the nearer the seat the higher the honour. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-483" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-484" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alluding to the phrase "Al-safar zafar"=voyaging is victory (Pilgrimage i., 127). <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-484" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-485" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Habb;" alluding to the black drop in the human heart which the Archangel Gabriel removed from Mohammed by opening his breast. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-485" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-486" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This phrase, I have said, often occurs: it alludes to the horripilation (<abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> Kush'arírah), horror or gooseflesh which, in Arab as in Hindu fables, is a symptom of great joy. So Boccaccio's "pelo arriciato" v., 8: Germ. Gänsehaut. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-486" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-487" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Hasanta ya Hasan"=Bene detto, Benedetto! the usual word-play vulgarly called "pun:" Hasan (not Hassan, as we <em>will</em> write it) meaning "beautiful." <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-487" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-488" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Loghah" also=a vocabulary, a dictionary; the Arabs had them by camel-loads. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-488" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-489" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The seventh of the sixteen "Bahr" (metres) in Arabic prosody; the easiest because allowing the most licence and, consequently, a favourite for didactic, homiletic and gnomic themes. It means literally "agitated" and was originally applied to the rude song of the Cameleer. De Sacy calls this doggrel "the poet's ass" (Torrens, Notes xxvi.). It was the only metre in which Mohammed the Apostle ever spoke: he was no poet (Koran xxxvi., 69) but he occasionally recited a verse and recited it wrongly (Dabistan iii., 212). In Persian prosody Rajaz is the seventh of nineteen and has six distinct varieties (pp. 79-81, "Gladwin's Dissertations on Rhetoric," <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> Calcutta, 1801). I shall have more to say about it in the terminal Essay. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-489" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-490" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Her stature tall—I hate a dumpy woman" (Don Juan). <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-490" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-491" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A worthy who was Kazi of Kufah (Cufa) in the seventh century. Al-Najaf, generally entitled "Najaf al-Ashraf" (the Venerand) is the place where Ali, the son-in-law of Mohammed, lies or is supposed to lie buried, and has ever been a holy place to the Shi'ahs. I am not certain whether to translate "Sa'alab" by fox or jackal; the Arabs make scant distinction between them. "Abu Hosayn" (Father of the Fortlet) is certainly the fox, and as certainly "Sha'arhar" is the jackal from the Pehlevi Shagál or Shaghál. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-491" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-492" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Usually by all manner of extortions and robbery, corruption and bribery, the ruler's motto being</p>
					<div class="c016 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">Fiat <em>in</em>justitia ruat Cœlum.</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>There is no more honest man than the Turkish peasant or the private soldier; but the process of deterioration begins when he is made a corporal and culminates in the Pasha. Moreover official dishonesty is permitted by public opinion, because it belongs to the condition of society. A man buys a place (as in England two centuries ago) and retains it by presents to the heads of offices. Consequently he must recoup himself in some way, and he mostly does so by grinding the faces of the poor and by spoiling the widow and the orphan. The radical cure is high pay; but that phase of society refuses to afford it. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-492" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-493" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Malik" (King) and "Malak" (angel) the words being written the same when lacking vowels and justifying the jingle. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-493" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-494" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Hurr"; the Latin "ingenuus," lit. freeborn; metaph. noble as opp. to a slave who is not expected to do great or good deeds. In pop. use it corresponds, like "Fatá," with our "gentleman." <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-494" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-495" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is one of the best tales for humour and movement, and Douce and Madden show what a rich crop of fabliaux, whose leading incident was the disposal of a dead body, it produced. <a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-495" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-496" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Other editions read, "at Bassorah" and the Bresl. (ii. 123) "at Bassorah and Kájkár" (Káshghár): somewhat like in Dover and Sebastopol. I prefer China because further off and making the improbabilities more notable. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-496" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-497" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Judri," lit. "small stones" from the hard gravelly feeling of the pustules (Rodwell, p. 20). The disease is generally supposed to be the growth of Central Africa where it is still a plague and passed over to Arabia about the birth-time of Mohammed. Thus is usually explained the "war of the elephant" (Koran, <abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> cv.) when the Abyssinian army of Abrahah, the Christian, was destroyed by swallows (Abábíl which Major Price makes the plural of Abilah=a vesicle) which dropped upon them "stones of baked clay," like vetches (Pilgrimage ii. 175). See for details Sale (<em><span xml:lang="la">in loco</span></em>) who seems to accept the miraculous defence of the Ka'abah. For the horrors of small-pox in Central Intertropical Africa the inoculation, known also to the Badawin of Al-Hijáz and other details, readers will consult "The Lake Regions of Central Africa" (ii. 318). The Hindus "take the bull by the horns" and boldly make "Sítlá" (small-pox) a goddess, an incarnation of Bhawáni, deëss of destruction-reproduction. In China small pox is believed to date from B.C. 1200; but the chronology of the Middle Kingdom still awaits the sceptic. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-497" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-498" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Europe we should add "and all fled, especially the women." But the fatalism inherent in the Eastern mind makes the great difference. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-498" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-499" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Uzayr." Esdras was a manner of Ripp van Winkle. He was riding over the ruins of Jerusalem when it had been destroyed by the Chaldeans and he doubted by what means Allah would restore it; whereupon he died and at the end of a hundred years he revived. He found his basket of figs and cruse of wine as they were; but of his ass only the bones remained. These were raised to life as Ezra looked on and the ass began at once to bray. Which was a lesson to Esdras. (Koran, <abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> ii). The oath by the ass's hoofs is to ridicule the Jew. Mohammed seems to have had an <em><span xml:lang="fr">idée fixe</span></em> that "the Jews say, Ezra is the son of God" (Koran ix.); it may have arisen from the heterodox Jewish belief that Ezra, when the Law was utterly lost, dictated the whole anew to the scribes of his own memory. His tomb with the huge green dome is still visited by the Jews of Baghdad. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-499" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-500" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Bádhanj," the <abbr title="Persian">Pers.</abbr> Bád (wind)-gír (catcher): a wooden pent-house on the terrace-roof universal in the nearer East. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-500" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-501" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The hunchback, in Arabia as in Southern Europe, is looked upon by the vulgar with fear and aversion: The reason is that he is usually sharper-witted than his neighbours. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-501" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-502" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Yá Sattár"=Thou who veilest the discreditable secrets of Thy creatures. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-502" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-503" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Nasráni," a follower of Him of Nazareth and an older name than "Christian" which (Acts xi., 26) was first given at Antioch about A.D. 43. The cry in Alexandria used to be "Ya Nasráni, Kalb awáni!"=O Nazarene! O dog obscene! (Pilgrimage, 1., 160). "Christian" in Arabic can be expressed only by "Masíhi"=follower of the Messiah. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-503" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-504" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Tasbíh,"=Saluting in the Subh (morning). <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-504" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-505" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the East women stand on minor occasions while men squat on their hunkers in a way hardly possible to an untrained European. The custom is old. Herodotus (ii., 35) says, "The women stand up when they make water, but the men sit down." Will it be believed that Canon Rawlinson was too modest to leave this passage in his translation? The custom was perpetuated by Al-Islam because the position prevents the ejection touching the clothes and making them ceremonially impure; possibly they borrowed it from the Guebres. Dabistan, Gate xvi. says, "It is improper, whilst in an erect posture, to make water; it is therefore necessary to sit at squat and force it to some distance, repeating the Avesta mentally." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-505" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-506" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is still a popular form of the "Kinchin lay," and as the turbands are often of fine stuff, the <em><span xml:lang="fr">petite industrie</span></em> pays well. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-506" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-507" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Wali"=Governor; the term still in use for the Governor-General of a Province as opposed to the "Muháfiz," or district-governor. In Eastern Arabia the Wali is the Civil Governor opposed to the Amir or Military Commandant. Under the Caliphate the Wali acted also as Prefect of Police (the Indian Faujdár), who is now called "Zábit." The older name for the latter was "Sáhib al-Shartah" (=chief of the watch) or "Mutawalli"; and it was his duty to go the rounds in person. The old "Charley," with his lantern and cudgel, still guards the bazars in Damascus. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-507" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-508" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Al-Mashá ilí"=the bearer of a cresset (Mash'al) who was also Jack Ketch. In Anglo-India the name is given to a lower body-servant. The "Mash'al" which Lane (M. E., chapt vi.) calls "Mesh'al" and illustrates, must not be confounded with its congener the "Sha'ílah" or link (also lamp, wick, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>). <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-508" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-509" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I need hardly say that the civilised "drop" is unknown to the East where men are strung up as to a yardarm. This greatly prolongs the suffering. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-509" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-510" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Lukmah":=a mouthful. It is still the fashion amongst Easterns of primitive manners to take up a handful of rice, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>, ball it and put it into a friend's mouth <em><span xml:lang="la">honoris causâ</span></em>. When the friend is a European the expression of his face is generally a study. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-510" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-511" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I need hardly note that this is an old Biblical practice. The ass is used for city-work as the horse for fighting and travelling, the mule for burdens and the dromedary for the desert. But the Badawi, like the Indian, despises the monture and sings:—</p>
					<div class="c016 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">The back of the steed is a noble place;</div>
								<div class="line">But the mule's dishonour, the ass disgrace!</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>The fine white asses, often thirteen hands high, sold by the Banu Salíb and other Badawi tribes, will fetch £100, and more. I rode a little brute from Meccah to Jedda (42 miles) in one night and it came in with me cantering. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-511" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-512" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A dry measure of about five bushels (Cairo). The classical pronunciation is Irdabb and it measured 24 sa'a (gallons) each filling four outstretched hands. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-512" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-513" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Al-Jawáli" should be Al-Jáwali (Al-Makrizi) and the Bab al-Nasr (Gate of Victory) is that leading to Suez. I lived in that quarter as shown by my Pilgrimage (i. 62). <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-513" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-514" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Al-'ajalah," referring to a saying in every Moslem mouth, "Patience is from the Protector (Allah): Hurry is from Hell." That and "Inshallah bukra!" (Please God to-morrow!) are the traveller's <em><span xml:lang="fr">bêtes noires</span></em>. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-514" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-515" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here it is a polite equivalent for "fall to!" <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-515" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-516" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The left hand is used throughout the East for purposes of ablution and is considered unclean. To offer the left hand would be most insulting and no man ever strokes his beard with it or eats with it: hence, probably, one never sees a left-handed man throughout the Moslem east. In the Brazil for the same reason old-fashioned people will not take snuff with the right hand. And it is related of the Khataians that they prefer the left hand, "Because the heart, which is the Sultan of the city of the Body, hath his mansion on that side" (Rauzat al-Safá). <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-516" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-517" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Two feminine names; as we might say Mary and Martha. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-517" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-518" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It was near the Caliph's two Palaces (Al-Kasrayn); and was famous in the 15th century A.D. The Kazi's Mahkamah (Court-house) now occupies the place of the Two Palaces. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-518" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-519" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A Kaysariah is a superior kind of bazar, a "bezestein." That in the text stood to the east of the principal street in Cairo and was built in A. H. 502 (=1108-9) by a Circassian Emir, known as Fakhr al-Din Jahárkas, a corruption of the Persian "Chehár-kas"=four persons (Lane, i. 422, from Al-Makrizi and Ibn Khallikan). For Jahárkas the Mac. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> has Jirjís (George) a common Christian name. I once lodged in a "Wakálah (the modern Khan) Jirjis." Pilgrimage, i. 255. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-519" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-520" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Second Day," <em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> after Saturday, the true Sabbath, so marvellously ignored by Christendom. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-520" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-521" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Readers who wish to know how a traveller is lodged in a Wakálah, Khan, or Caravanserai, will consult my Pilgrimage, i. 60. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-521" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-522" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The original occupation of the family had given it a name, as amongst us. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-522" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-523" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The usual "chaff" or banter allowed even to modest women when shopping, and—many a true word is spoken in jest. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-523" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-524" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"La adamnák"=Heaven deprive us not of thee, <em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> grant I see thee often! <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-524" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-525" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is a somewhat cavalier style of advance; but Easterns under such circumstances go straight to the point, hating to filer the parfait amour. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-525" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-526" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The peremptory formula of a slave delivering such a message. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-526" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-527" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This would be our Thursday night, preceding the day of public prayers which can be performed only when in a state of ceremonial purity. Hence many Moslems go to the Hammam on Thursday and have no connection with their wives till Friday night. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-527" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-528" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lane (i. 423) gives ample details concerning the Habbániyah, or grain-sellers' quarter in the southern part of Cairo; and shows that when this tale was written (or transcribed?) the city was almost as extensive as it is now. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-528" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-529" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nakíb is a caravan-leader, a chief, a syndic; and "Abú Shámah"=Father of a cheek mole, while "Abú Shámmah"=Father of a smeller, a nose, a snout. The "Kuniyah," bye-name, patronymic or matronymic, is necessary amongst Moslems whose list of names, all connected more or less with religion, is so scanty. Hence Buckingham the traveller was known as Abu Kidr, the Father of a Cooking-pot and Hajj Abdullah as Abu Shawárib, Father of Mustachios (Pilgrimage, iii., 263). <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-529" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-530" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>More correctly Bab Zawilah from the name of a tribe in Northern Africa. This gate dates from the same age as the Eastern or Desert gate, Bab al-Nasr (A.D. 1087) and is still much admired. M. Jomard describes it (Description, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>, ii. 670) and lately my good friend Yacoub Artin Pasha has drawn attention to it in the Bulletin de l'Inst. Egypt., Deuxième Série, No. 4, 1883. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-530" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-531" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This ornament is still seen in the older saloons of Damascus: the inscriptions are usually religious sentences, extracts from the Koran, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>, in uncial characters. They take the place of our frescos; and, as a work of art, are generally far superior. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-531" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-532" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Bayáz al-Sultání," the best kind of gypsum which shines like polished marble. The stucco on the walls of Alexandria, built by Alexander of the two Horns, was so exquisitely tempered and beautifully polished that men had to wear masks for fear of blindness. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-532" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-533" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This Iklíl, a complicated affair, is now obsolete, its place having been taken by the "Kurs," a gold plate, some five inches in diameter, set with jewels, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> Lane (M. E. Appendix A) figures it. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-533" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-534" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The woman-artist who applies the dye is called "Munakkishah." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-534" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-535" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Kissing with th' inner lip," as Shakespeare calls it; the French <em><span xml:lang="fr">langue fourrée</span></em>; and Sankrit "Samputa." The subject of kissing is extensive in the East. Ten different varieties are duly enumerated in the "Ananga-Ranga;" or, The Hindu Art of Love (Ars Amoris Indica) translated from the Sanscrit, and annotated by A. F. F. and B. F. R. It is also connected with unguiculation, or impressing the nails, of which there are seven kinds; morsication (seven kinds); handling the hair and tappings or pattings with the fingers and palm (eight kinds). <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-535" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-536" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "asal-nahl," to distinguish it from "honey" <em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> syrup of sugar-cane and fruits. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-536" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-537" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The lines have occurred in Night xii. By way of variety I give Torrens' version p. 273. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-537" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-538" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The way of carrying money in the corner of a pocket-handkerchief is still common. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-538" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-539" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He sent the provisions not to be under an obligation to her in this matter. And she received them to judge thereby of his liberality. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-539" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-540" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Those who have seen the process of wine-making in the Libanus will readily understand why it is always strained. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-540" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-541" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Kulkasá," a kind of arum or yam, eaten boiled like our potatoes. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-541" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-542" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>At first he slipped the money into the bed-clothes: now he gives it openly and she accepts it for a reason. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-542" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-543" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> Al-Zalamah: lit.=tyrants, oppressors, applied to the police and generally to the employés of Government. It is a word which tells a history. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-543" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-544" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Moslem law is never completely satisfied till the criminal confess. It also utterly ignores circumstantial evidence and for the best of reasons: amongst so sharp-witted a people the admission would lead to endless abuses. I greatly surprised a certain Governor-General of India by giving him this simple information. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-544" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-545" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cutting off the right hand is the Koranic punishment (<abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> v.) for one who robs an article worth four dinars, about forty francs to shillings. The left foot is to be cut off at the ankle for a second offence and so on; but death is reserved for a hardened criminal. The practice is now obsolete and theft is punished by the bastinado, fine or imprisonment. The old Guebres were as severe. For stealing one dirham's worth they took a fine of two, cut off the ear-lobes, gave ten stick-blows and dismissed the criminal who had been subjected to an hour's imprisonment. A second theft caused the penalties to be doubled; and after that the right hand was cut off or death was inflicted according to the proportion stolen. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-545" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-546" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Koran viii. 17. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-546" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-547" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A universal custom in the East, the object being originally to show that the draught was not poisoned. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-547" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-548" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Out of paste or pudding. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-548" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-549" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Boils and pimples are supposed to be caused by broken hair-roots and in Hindostani are called Bál-tor. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-549" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-550" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He intended to bury it decently, a respect which Moslems always show even to the exuviæ of the body, as hair and nail parings. Amongst Guebres the latter were collected and carried to some mountain. The practice was intensified by fear of demons or wizards getting possession of the spoils. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-550" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-551" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Without which the marriage was not valid. The minimum is ten dirhams (drachmas) now valued at about five francs to shillings; and if a man marry without naming the sum, the woman, after consummation, can compel him to pay this minimum. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-551" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-552" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Khatmah"=reading or reciting the whole Koran, by one or more persons, usually in the house, not over the tomb. Like the "Zikr," Litany or Rogation, it is a pious act confined to certain occasions. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-552" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-553" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Zírbájah"=meat dressed with vinegar, cumin-seed (<abbr title="Persian">Pers.</abbr> Zír) and hot spices. More of it in the sequel of the tale. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-553" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-554" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A saying not uncommon meaning, let each man do as he seems fit; also="age quod agis": and at times corresponding with our saw about the cap-fitting. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-554" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-555" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Su'úd," an Alpinia with pungent rhizome like ginger; here used as a counter-odour. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-555" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-556" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Tá'ih"=lost in the "Tíh," a desert wherein man <em>may</em> lose himself, translated in our maps "The Desert of the Wanderings," scil. of the children of Israel. "Credat Judæus." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-556" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-557" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em>, £125 and £500. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-557" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-558" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A large sum was weighed by a professional instead of being counted, the reason being that the coin is mostly old and worn: hence our words "pound" and "pension" (or what is weighed out). <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-558" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-559" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The eunuch is the best possible go-between on account of his almost unlimited power over the Harem. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-559" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-560" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> a slave-girl brought up in the house and never sold except for some especial reason, as habitual drunkenness, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-560" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-561" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Smuggling men into the Harem is a stock "topic" of eastern tales. "By means of their female attendants, the ladies of the royal harem generally get men into their apartments in the disguise of women." Says Vatsyayana in The Kama Sutra, Part V., London: Printed for the Hindoo Kamashastra Society, 1883. For private circulation only. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-561" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-562" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These tears are shed over past separation. So the "Indians" of the New World never meet after long parting without beweeping mutual friends they have lost. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-562" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-563" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A most important Jack in office whom one can see with his smooth chin and blubber lips, starting up from his lazy snooze in the shade and delivering his orders more peremptorily than any Dogberry. These epicenes are as curious and exceptional in character as in external conformation. Disconnected, after a fashion, with humanity, they are brave, fierce and capable of any villany or barbarity (as Agha Mohammed Khan in Persia 1795-98). The frame is unnaturally long and lean, especially the arms and legs; with high, flat, thin shoulders; big protruding joints and a face by contrast extraordinarily large, a veritable mask; the Castrato is expert in the use of weapons and sits his horse admirably, riding well "home" in the saddle for the best of reasons; and his hoarse thick voice, which apparently does not break, as in the European "Cáppone," invests him with all the circumstance of command. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-563" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-564" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From the Meccan well used by Moslems much like Eau de Lourdes by Christians: the water is saltish, hence the touch of Arab humour (Pilgrimage III., 201-202.) <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-564" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-565" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Such articles would be sacred from Moslem eyes. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-565" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-566" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Physiologically true, but not generally mentioned in describing the emotions. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-566" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-567" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Properly "Uta," the different rooms, each "Odalisque," or concubine, having her own. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-567" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-568" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Showing that her monthly ailment was over. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-568" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-569" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Muhammarah"=either browned before the fire or artificially reddened. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-569" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-570" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The insolence and licence of these palace-girls was (and is) unlimited; especially when, as in the present case, they have to deal with a "softy." On this subject numberless stories are current throughout the East. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-570" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-571" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> blackened by the fires of Jehannam. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-571" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-572" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Bi'l-Salámah"=in safety (to avert the evil eye). When visiting the sick it is usual to say something civil; "The Lord heal thee! No evil befal thee!" <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-572" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-573" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Washing during sickness is held dangerous by Arabs; and "going to the Hammam" is, I have said, equivalent to convalescence. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-573" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-574" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Máristán" (pronounced Múristan) a corruption of the <abbr title="Persian">Pers.</abbr> "Bímáristán"=place of sickness, a hospital much affected by the old Guebres (Dabistan, i., 165, 166). That of Damascus was the first Moslem hospital, founded by Al-Walid Son of Abd al-Malik the Ommiade in A.H. 88=706-7. Benjamin of Tudela (A.D. 1164) calls it "Dar-al-Maraphtan" which his latest Editor explains by "Dar-al-Mora-bittan" (abode of those who require being chained). Al-Makrizi (Khitat) ascribes the invention of "Spitals" to Hippocrates; another historian to an early Pharaoh "Manákiyush;" thus ignoring the Persian Kings, Saint Ephrem (or Ephraim) Syru <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> In modern parlance "Maristan" is a madhouse where the maniacs are treated with all the horrors which were universal in Europe till within a few years and of which occasional traces occur to this day. In A.D. 1399 Katherine de la Court held a "hospital in the Court called Robert de Paris;" but the first madhouse in Christendom was built by the legate Ortiz in Toledo A.D. 1483, and was therefore called Casa del Nuncio. The Damascus "Maristan" was described by every traveller of the last century: and it showed a curious contrast between the treatment of the maniac and the idiot or omadhaun, who is humanely allowed to wander about unharmed, if not held a Saint. When I saw it last (1870) it was all but empty and mostly in ruins. As far as my experience goes, the United States is the only country where the insane are rationally treated by the sane. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-574" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-575" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hence the trite saying "Whoso drinks the water of the Nile will ever long to drink it again." "Light" means easily digested water; and the great test is being able to drink it at night between the sleeps, without indigestion. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-575" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-576" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Níl" in popular parlance is the Nile in flood, although also used for the River as a proper name. Egyptians (modern as well as ancient), have three seasons Al-Shitá (winter), Al-Sayf (summer) and Al-Níl (the Nile <em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> flood season, our mid-summer); corresponding with the Growth-months; Housing (or granary) months and Flood-months of the older race. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-576" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-577" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These lines are in the Mac. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-577" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-578" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Birkat al-Habash," a tank formerly existing in Southern Cairo: Galland (Night 128) says "en remontant vers l'Éthiopie." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-578" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-579" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Bres. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> (ii., 190) from which I borrow this description, here alludes to the well-known Island, Al-Rauzah (Rodah)=The Garden. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-579" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-580" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Laylat al-Wafá," the night of the completion or abundance of the Nile (flood), usually between August 6th and 16th, when the government proclaims that the Nilometer shows a rise of 16 cubits. Of course it is a great festival and a high ceremony, for Egypt is still the gift of the Nile (Lane M. E. <abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> xxvi—a work which would be much improved by a better index). <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-580" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-581" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> admiration will be complete. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-581" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-582" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Sáhil Masr" (Misr): hence I suppose Galland's <em><span xml:lang="fr">villes maritimes</span></em>. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-582" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-583" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A favourite simile, suggested by the broken glitter and shimmer of the stream under the level rays and the breeze of eventide. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-583" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-584" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Halab," derived by Moslems from "He (Abraham) milked (<em>halaba</em>) the white and dun cow." But the name of the city occurs in the Cuneiforms as Halbun or Khalbun, and the classics knew it as <span xml:lang="el">Βέροια</span>, Beroea, written with variants. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-584" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-585" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Ká'ah," usually a saloon; but also applied to a fine house here and elsewhere in The Nights. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-585" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-586" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Ghamz"=winking, signing with the eye which, amongst Moslems, is not held "vulgar." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-586" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-587" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Kamís" from low Lat. "Camicia," first found in St. Jerome:—"Solent militantes habere lineas, quas Camicias vocant." Our shirt, chemise, chemisette, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> was unknown to the Ancients of Europe. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-587" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-588" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Narjís." The Arabs borrowed nothing, but the Persians much, from Greek Mythology. Hence the eye of Narcissus, an idea hardly suggested by the look of the daffodil (or asphodel) flower, is at times the glance of a spy and at times the die-away look of a mistress. Some scholars explain it by the form of the flower, the internal calyx resembling the iris, and the stalk being bent just below the petals suggesting drooping eyelids and languid eyes. Hence a poet addresses the Narcissus:—</p>
					<div class="c016 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">O Narjis, look away! Before those eyes ✿ I may not kiss her as a-breast she lies.</div>
								<div class="line">What! Shall the lover close his eyes in sleep ✿ While thine watch all things between earth and skies?</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>The fashionable lover in the East must affect a frantic jealousy if he does not feel it. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-588" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-589" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Egypt there are neither bedsteads nor bed-rooms: the carpets and mattresses, pillows and cushions (sheets being unknown) are spread out when wanted, and during the day are put into chests or cupboards, or only rolled up in a corner of the room (Pilgrimage i., 53). <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-589" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-590" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The women of Damascus have always been famed for the sanguinary jealousy with which European story-books and novels credit the "Spanish lady." The men were as celebrated for intolerance and fanaticism, which we first read of in the days of Bertrandon de la Brocquière and which culminated in the massacre of 1860. Yet they are a notoriously timid race and make, physically and morally, the worst of soldiers: we proved that under my late friend Fred. Walpole in the Bashi-Buzuks during the old Crimean war. The men looked very fine fellows and after a month in camp fell off to the condition of old women. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-590" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-591" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Rukhám," properly=alabaster and "Marmar"=marble; but the two are often confounded. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-591" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-592" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He was ceremonially impure after touching a corpse. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-592" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-593" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The phrase is perfectly appropriate: Cairo without "her Nile" would be nothing. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-593" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-594" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"The market was hot" say the Hindustanis. This would begin between 7 and 8 <abbr title="ante meridiem">a.m.</abbr> <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-594" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-595" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> Al-Faranj, Europeans generally. It is derived from "Gens Francorum," and dates from Crusading days when the French played the leading part. Hence the Lingua Franca, the Levantine jargon, of which Molière has left such a witty specimen. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-595" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-596" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A process familiar to European surgery of the same date. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-596" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-597" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In sign of disappointment, regret, vexation; a gesture still common amongst Moslems and corresponding in significance to a certain extent with our stamping, wringing the hands and so forth. It is not mentioned in the Koran where, however, we find "biting fingers' ends out of wrath" against a man (<abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> iii). <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-597" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-598" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is no unmerited scandal. The Cairenes, especially the feminine half (for reasons elsewhere given), have always been held exceedingly debauched. Even the modest Lane gives a "shocking" story of a woman enjoying her lover under the nose of her husband and confining the latter in a madhouse (<abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> xiii.) With civilisation, which objects to the good old remedy, the sword, they become worse: and the Kazi's court is crowded with would-be divorcees. Under English rule the evil has reached its acme because it goes unpunished: in the avenues of the new Isma'iliyah Quarter, inhabited by Europeans, women, even young women, will threaten to expose their persons unless they receive "bakhshísh." It was the same in Sind when husbands were assured that they would be hanged for cutting down adulterous wives: at once after its conquest the women broke loose; and in 1843-50, if a young officer sent to the bazar for a girl, half-a-dozen would troop to his quarters. Indeed more than once the professional prostitutes threatened to memorialise Sir Charles Napier because the "modest women," the "ladies" were taking the bread out of their mouths. The same was the case at Kabul (Caboul) of Afghanistan in the old war of 1840; and here the women had more excuse, the husbands being notable sodomites as the song has it:—</p>
					<div class="c016 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">The worth of slit the Afghan knows;</div>
								<div class="line">The worth of hole the Kábul-man.</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-598" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-599" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>So that he might not have to do with three sisters german. Moreover amongst Moslems a girl's conduct is presaged by that of her mother; and if one sister go wrong, the other is expected to follow suit. Practically the rule applies everywhere: "like mother like daughter." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-599" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-600" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In sign of dissent; as opposed to nodding the head which signifies assent. These are two items, apparently instinctive and universal, of man's gesture-language which has been so highly cultivated by sundry North American tribes and by the surdo-mute establishments of Europe. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-600" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-601" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This "Futur" is the real "breakfast" of the East, the "Chhoti házri" (petit déjeûner) of India, a bit of bread, a cup of coffee or tea and a pipe on rising. In the text, however it is a ceremonious affair. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-601" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-602" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Nahs," a word of many meanings; a sinister aspect of the stars (as in <abbr title="Hebrew">Heb.</abbr> and Aram.) or, adjectively, sinister, of ill-omen. Vulgarly it is used as the reverse of nice and corresponds, after a fashion with our "nasty." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-602" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-603" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Window-gardening," new in England, is an old practise in the East. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-603" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-604" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Her pimping instinct at once revealed the case to her. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-604" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-605" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The usual "pander-dodge" to get more money. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-605" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-606" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The writer means that the old woman's account was all false, to increase apparent difficulties and <em><span xml:lang="fr">pour se faire valoir</span></em>. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-606" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-607" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Yá Khálati"=mother's sister; a familiar address to the old, as uncle or nuncle (father's brother) to a man. The Arabs also hold that as a girl resembles her mother so a boy follows his uncle (mother's brother): hence the address "Ya tayyib al-Khál!"=O thou nephew of a good uncle. I have noted that physically this is often fact. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-607" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-608" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Ay w' Alláhi," contracted popularly to Aywa, a word in every Moslem mouth and shunned by Christians because against orders Hebrew and Christian. The better educated Turks now eschew that eternal reference to Allah which appears in The Nights and which is still the custom of the vulgar throughout the world of Al-Islam. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-608" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-609" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The "Muzayyin" or barber in the East brings his basin and budget under his arm: he is not content only to shave, he must scrape the forehead, trim the eyebrows, pass the blade lightly over the nose and correct the upper and lower lines of the mustachios, opening the central parting and so forth. He is not a whit less a tattler and a scandalmonger than the old Roman tonsor or Figaro his <em><span xml:lang="fr">confrère</span></em> in Southern Europe. The whole scene of the Barber is admirable, an excellent specimen of Arab humour and not over-caricatured. We all have met him. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-609" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-610" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Abdullah ibn Abbas was a cousin and a companion of the Apostle; also a well-known Commentator on the Koran and conserver of the traditions of Mohammed. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-610" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-611" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I have noticed the antiquity of this father of our sextant, a fragment of which was found in the Palace of Sennacherib. More concerning the "Arstable" (as Chaucer calls it) is given in my "Camoens: his Life and his Lusiads" p. 381. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-611" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-612" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Simiyá" to rhyme with Kímiyá (alchemy proper). It is a subordinate branch of the Ilm al-Ruháni which I would translate "Spiritualism," and which is divided into two great branches, "Ilwí or Rahmáni" (the high or related to the Deity) and Siflí or Shaytáni (low, Satanic). To the latter belongs Al-Sahr, magic or the black art proper, gramarye, egromancy, while Al-Simiyá is white magic, electro-biology, a kind of natural and deceptive magic, in which drugs and perfumes exercise an important action. One of its principal branches is the Darb al-Mandal or magic mirror, of which more in a future page. See Boccaccio's Day x. Novel 5. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-612" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-613" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Chapter">Chapt.</abbr> iii. 128. See Sale (in loco) for the noble application of this text by the Imam Hasan, son of the Caliph Ali. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-613" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-614" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These proverbs at once remind us of our old friend Sancho Panza and are equally true to nature in the mouth of the Arab and of the Spaniard. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-614" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-615" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Our nurses always carry in the arms: Arabs place the children astraddle upon the hip and when older on the shoulder. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-615" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-616" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Eastern clothes allow this biblical display of sorrow and vexation, which with our European garb would look absurd: we must satisfy ourselves with maltreating our hats. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-616" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-617" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Koran xlviii., 8. It may be observed that according to the Ahádis (sayings of the Prophet) and the Sunnat (sayings and doings of Mahommed), all the hair should be allowed to grow or the whole head be clean shaven. Hence the "Shúshah," or topknot supposed to be left as a handle for drawing the wearer into Paradise; and the Zulf, or side-locks, somewhat like the ringlets of the Polish Jews, are both vain "Bida'at," or innovations, and therefore technically termed "Makrúh," a practice not laudable, neither "Halál" (perfectly lawful) nor "Harám" (forbidden by the law). When boys are first shaved, generally in the second or third year, a tuft is left on the crown and another over the forehead: but this is not the fashion amongst adults. Abu Hanifah, if I am rightly informed, wrote a treatise on the Shushah or long lock growing from the Násiyah (head-poll) which is also a precaution lest the decapitated Moslem's mouth be defiled by an impure hand; and thus it would resemble the chivalry-lock by which the Redskin brave (and even the "cowboy" of better times) facilitated the removal of his own scalp. Possibly the Turks had learned the practice from the Chinese and introduced it into Baghdad (Pilgrimage i., 240). The Badawi plait their locks in Kurún (horns) or Jadáil (ringlets) which are undone only to be washed with the water of the she-camel. The wild Sherifs wear Haffah, long elf-locks hanging down both sides of the throat, and shaved away about a finger's breadth round the forehead and behind the neck (Pilgrimage iii., 35-36). I have elsewhere noted the <em><span xml:lang="fr">accroche-cœurs</span></em>, the "idiot-fringe," <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-617" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-618" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Meats are rarely coloured in modern days; but Persian cooks are great adepts in staining rice for the "Puláo" (which we call after its Turkish corruption "pilaff"): it sometimes appears in rainbow-colours, red, yellow and blue; and in India is covered with gold and silver leaf. Europe retains the practice in tinting Pasch (Easter) eggs, the survival of the mundane ovum which was hatched at Easter-tide; and they are dyed red in allusion to the Blood of Redemption. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-618" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-619" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As I have noticed this is a mixture. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-619" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-620" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>We say:—</p>
					<div class="c016 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">'Tis rare the father in the son we see:</div>
								<div class="line">He sometimes rises in the third degree.</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-620" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-621" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Ballán" <em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> the body-servant: "Ballánah" is a tire-woman. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-621" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-622" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Darabukkah" a drum made of wood or earthenware (Lane, M. E., xviii.), and used by all in Egypt. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-622" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-623" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Naihah" more generally "Naddábah" Lat. præfica or carina, a hired mourner, the Irish "Keener" at the conclamatio or coronach, where the Hullabaloo, Hulululu or Ululoo showed the survivors' sorrow. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-623" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-624" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These doggrels, which are like our street melodies, are now forgotten and others have taken their place. A few years ago one often heard, "Dus ya lallí" (tread, O my joy) and "Názil il'al-Ganínah" (Down into the garden) and these in due turn become obsolete. Lane (M. E. <abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> xviii.) gives the former <em><abbr title="exempli gratia">e.g.</abbr></em></p>
					<div class="c016 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">Tread, O my joy! Tread, O my joy!</div>
								<div class="line">Love of my love brings sore annoy,</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>A chorus to such stanzas as:—</p>
					<div class="c016 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">Alexandrian damsels rare! ✿ Daintily o'er the floor ye fare:</div>
								<div class="line">Your lips are sweet, are sugar-sweet, ✿ And purfled Cashmere shawls ye wear!</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>It maybe noted that "humming" is not a favourite practice with Moslems; if one of the company begin, another will say, "Go to the Kahwah" (the coffee-house, the proper music-hall) "and sing there!" I have elsewhere observed their dislike to Al-sifr or whistling. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-624" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-625" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> Khalí'a=worn out, crafty, an outlaw; used like <abbr title="Spanish">Span.</abbr> "<span xml:lang="es">Perdido</span>." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-625" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-626" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Zabbál" is the scavenger, lit. a dung-drawer, especially for the use of the Hammam which is heated with the droppings of animals. "Wakkád" (stoker) is the servant who turns the fire. The verses are mere nonsense to suit the Barber's humour. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-626" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-627" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Yá bárid"=O fool. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-627" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-628" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This form of blessing is chaunted from the Minaret about half-an-hour before midday, when the worshippers take their places in the mosque. At noon there is the usual Azán or prayer-call, and each man performs a two-bow, in honour of the mosque and its gathering, as it were. The Prophet is then blessed and a second Salám is called from the raised ambo or platform ("dikkah") by the divines who repeat the midday-call. Then an Imam recites the first Khutbah, or sermon "of praise"; and the congregation worships in silence. This is followed by the second exhortation "of Wa'az," dispensing the words of wisdom. The Imam now stands up before the Mihráb (prayer niche) and recites the Ikámah which is the common Azan with one only difference: after "Hie ye to salvation" it adds "Come is the time of supplication"; whence the name, "causing" (prayer) to stand (<em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> to begin). Hereupon the worshippers recite the Farz or Koran-commanded noon-prayer of Friday; and the unco'guid add a host of supererogatories. Those who would study the subject may consult Lane (M. E. <abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> iii. and its abstract in his "Arabian Nights," I, p. 430, or note 69 to <abbr title="Chapter">Chapt.</abbr> v.) <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-628" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-629" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em>, The women loosed their hair; an immodesty sanctioned only by a great calamity. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-629" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-630" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These small shops are composed of a "but" and a "ben" (Pilgrimage i. 99.) <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-630" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-631" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Kawwád," a popular term of abuse; hence the <abbr title="Spanish">Span.</abbr> and <abbr title="Portuguese">Port.</abbr> "<span xml:lang="pt">Alcoviteiro</span>." The Italian "<span xml:lang="it">Galeotto</span>" is from Galahalt, not Galahad. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-631" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-632" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> "one seeking assistance in Allah." He was the son of Al-Záhir bi'lláh (one pre-eminent by the decree of Allah). Lane says (i. 430), "great-grandson of Harun al-Rashid," alluding to the first Mustansir son of Al-Mutawakkil (regn. A.H. 247-248=861-2). But this is the 56th Abbaside and regn. A.H. 623-640 (=1226-1242). <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-632" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-633" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Yaum al-Id," the Kurban Bairam of the Turks, the Pilgrimage festival. The story is historical. In the "Akd," a miscellany compiled by Ibn Abd Rabbuh (vulg. Rabbi-hi) of Cordova, who ob. A.H. 328=940 we read:—A spunger found ten criminals and followed them, imagining they were going to a feast; but lo, they were going to their deaths. And when they were slain and he remained, he was brought before the Khalifah (Al-Maamun) and Ibrahim son of Al-Mahdi related a tale to procure pardon for the man, whereupon the Khalifah pardoned him. Lane ii, 506. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-633" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-634" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Nata' al-Dam"; the former word was noticed in the Tale of the Bull and the Ass. The leather of blood was not unlike the Sufrah and could be folded into a bag by a string running through rings round the edges. Moslem executioners were very expert and seldom failed to strike off the head with a single blow of the thin narrow blade with razor-edge, hard as diamond withal, which contrasted so strongly with the great coarse chopper of the European headsman. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-634" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-635" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The ground floor, which in all hot countries is held, and rightly so, unwholesome during sleep, is usually let for shops. This is also the case throughout Southern Europe, and extends to the Canary Islands and the Brazil. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-635" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-636" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This serious contemplation of street-scenery is one of the pleasures of the Harems. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-636" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-637" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>We should say "smiled at him": the laugh was not intended as an affront. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-637" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-638" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Fals ahmar." Fals is a fish-scale, also the smaller coin and the plural "Fulús" is the vulgar term for money (=Ital. <em><span xml:lang="it">quattrini</span></em>) without specifying the coin. It must not be confounded with the "Fazzah," alias "Nuss," alias "Páráh" (Turk.); the latter being made, not of "red copper" but of a vile alloy containing like the Greek "Asper," some silver; and representing, when at par, the fortieth of a piastre, the latter being=2d. ⅖ths. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-638" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-639" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Farajiyah," a long-sleeved robe; Lane's "Farageeyeh," M. E., <abbr title="chapter">chapt.</abbr> i. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-639" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-640" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The tailor in the East, as in Southern Europe, is made to cut out the cloth in presence of its owner to prevent "cabbaging." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-640" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-641" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Expecting a present. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-641" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-642" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alluding to the saying, "Kiss is the key to Kitty." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-642" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-643" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The "panel-dodge" is fatally common throughout the East, where a man found in the house of another is helpless. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-643" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-644" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This was the beginning of horseplay which often ends in a bastinado. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-644" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-645" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hair-dyes, in the East, are all of vegetable matter, henna, indigo-leaves, galls, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr>: our mineral dyes are, happily for them, unknown. Herklots will supply a host of recipes. The Egyptian mixture which I quoted in Pilgrimage (ii., 274) is sulphate of iron and ammoniure of iron one part and gall nuts two parts, infused in eight parts of distilled water. It is innocuous but very poor as a dye. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-645" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-646" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> Amrad, etymologically "beardless and handsome," but often used in a bad sense, to denote an effeminate, a catamite. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-646" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-647" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Hindus prefer "having the cardinal points as her sole garment." Vêtu de climat, says Madame de Stael. In Paris nude statues are "draped in cerulean blue." Rabelais (iv., 29) robes King Shrovetide in grey and gold of a comical cut, nothing before, nothing behind with sleeves of the same. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-647" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-648" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This scene used to be enacted a few years ago in Paris for the benefit of concealed spectators, a young American being the victim. It was put down when one of the lookers-on lost his eye by a pen-knife thrust into the "crevice." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-648" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-649" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Meaning that the trick had been played by the Wazir's wife or daughter. I could mention sundry names at Cairo whose charming owners have done worse things than this unseemly frolic. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-649" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-650" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Shayyun li'lláhi," a beggar's formula=per amor di Dio. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-650" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-651" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Noting how sharp-eared the blind become. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-651" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-652" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The blind in Egypt are notorious for insolence and violence, fanaticism and rapacity. Not a few foreigners have suffered from them (Pilgrimage i. 148). In former times many were blinded in infancy by their mothers, and others blinded themselves to escape conscription or honest hard work. They could always obtain food, especially as Mu'ezzins; and were preferred because they could not take advantage of the minaret by spying into their neighbours' households. The Egyptian race is chronically weak-eyed, the effect of the damp hot climate of the valley, where ophthalmia prevailed even during the pre-Pharaohnic days. The great Sesostris died stone-blind and his successor lost his sight for ten years (Pilgrimage ii., 176). That the Fellahs are now congenitally weak-eyed, may by seen by comparing them with negroes imported from Central Africa. Ophthalmia rages, especially during the damp season, in the lower Nile-valley; and the best cure for it is a fortnight's trip to the Desert where, despite glare, sand and wind, the eye readily recovers tone. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-652" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-653" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> With kicks and cuffs, and blows, as is the custom. (Pilgrimage i., 174.) <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-653" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-654" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> Káid (whence "Alcayde") a word still much used in North Western Africa. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-654" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-655" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Sullam"=lit. a ladder; a frame-work of sticks, used by way of our triangles or whipping-posts. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-655" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-656" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is one of the feats of Al-Simiyá=white magic; fascinating the eyes. In Europe it has lately taken the name of "Electro-biology." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-656" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-657" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Again by means of the "Simiyá" or power of fascination possessed by the old scoundrel. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-657" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-658" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A formula for averting "Al-Ayn," the evil eye. It is always unlucky to meet a one-eyed man, especially the first thing in the morning and when setting out on any errand. The idea is that the fascinated one will suffer from some action of the physical eye. Monoculars also are held to be rogues: so the Sanskrit saying "Few one-eyed men be honest men." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-658" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-659" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Al-Nashshár from Nashr=sawing: so the fiddler in Italian is called the "village-saw" (<em><span xml:lang="it">Sega del villaggio</span></em>). He is the Alnaschar of the Englished Galland and Richardson. The tale is very old. It appears as the Brahman and the Pot of Rice in the Panchatantra; and Professor Benfey believes (as usual with him) that this, with many others, derives from a Buddhist source. But I would distinctly derive it from Æsop's market-woman who kicked over her eggs; whence the Lat. prov. Ante victoriam canere triumphum=to sell the skin before you have caught the bear. In the "Kalilah and Dimnah" and its numerous offspring it is the "Ascetic with his Jar of oil and honey;" in Rabelais (i, 33) Echephron's shoemaker spills his milk, and so La Perette in La Fontaine. See M. Max Muller's "Chips," <abbr title="volume">vol.</abbr> iii., appendix. The curious reader will compare my version with that which appears at the end of Richardson's Arabic Grammar (<abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> of 1811): he had a better, or rather a fuller <abbr title="Manuscript">MS.</abbr> (p. 199) than any yet printed. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-659" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-660" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Atr"=any perfume especially oil of roses; whence our word "Ottar," through the Turkish corruption. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-660" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-661" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The texts give "dirhams" (100,000=5,000 dinars) for "dinars," a clerical error as the sequel shows. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-661" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-662" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Young slaves," says Richardson, losing "colour." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-662" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-663" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nothing more calculated to give affront than such a refusal. Richardson (p. 204) who, however, doubts his own version (p. 208) here translates, "and I will not give liberty to my soul (spouse) but in her apartments." The Arabic or rather Cairene, is, "wa lá akhalli rúhi"=I will not let myself go <em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> be my every-day self, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-663" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-664" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Whilst she is in astonishment and terror." (Richardson). <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-664" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-665" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Chamber of robes," Richardson whose text has "Nám" for "Manám." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-665" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-666" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Till I compleat her distress," Richardson, whose text is corrupt. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-666" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-667" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Sleep by her side," R. the word "Náma" bearing both senses. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-667" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-668" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Will take my hand," R. "takabbal" being also ambiguous. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-668" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-669" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Mu'arras" one who brings about "'Ars," marriages, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> So the Germ. "Kupplerinn," a Coupleress. It is one of the many synonyms for a pimp, and a word in general use (Pilgrimage i., 276). The most insulting term, like Dayyús, insinuates that the man panders for his own wife. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-669" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-670" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Of hands and face, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> See Night cccclxiv. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-670" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-671" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Sadakah" (sincerity), voluntary or superogatory alms, opposed to "Zakát" (purification), legal alms which are indispensable. "Prayer carries us half way to Allah; fasting brings us to the door of His palace and alms-deeds (Sadakah) causes us to enter." For "Zakát" no especial rate is fixed; but it should not be less than one-fortieth of property or two and a half per <abbr title="centage">cent.</abbr> Thus Al-Islam is, as far as I know, the only faith which makes a poor-rate (Zakát) obligatory and which has invented a property-tax, as opposed to the unjust and unfair income-tax upon which England prides herself. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-671" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-672" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A Greek girl. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-672" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-673" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This was making himself very easy; and the idea is that the gold in pouch caused him to be so bold. Lane's explanation (in loco) is all wrong. The pride engendered by sudden possession of money is a <em><span xml:lang="fr">lieu commun</span></em> amongst Eastern story-tellers; even in the beast-fables the mouse which has stolen a few gold pieces becomes confident and stouthearted. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-673" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-674" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Al-Málihah" also means the beautiful (<abbr title="feminine">fem.</abbr>), from "Milh"=salt, splendour, <abbr title="et cetera">etc.</abbr> The Mac. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> has "Mumallihah"=a salt-vessel. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-674" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-675" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> to see if he felt the smart. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-675" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-676" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Sardábeh" (Persian)=an underground room used for coolness in the hot season. It is unknown in Cairo but every house in Baghdad, in fact throughout the Mesopotamian cities, has one. It is on the principle of the underground cellar without which wine will not keep: Lane (i., 406) calls it a "vault." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-676" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-677" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the orig. "O old woman!" which is insulting. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-677" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-678" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>So the Italians say "a quail to skin." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-678" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-679" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Amán" is the word used for quarter on the battle-field; and there are Joe Millers about our soldiers in India mistaking it for "a man" or (<em>Scotticè</em>) "a mon." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-679" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-680" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Illustrating the Persian saying "Allah himself cannot help a fool." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-680" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-681" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Any article taken from the person and given to a criminal is a promise of pardon, of course on the implied condition of plenary confession and of becoming "King's evidence." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-681" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-682" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A naive proposal to share the plunder. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-682" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-683" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In popular literature "Schacabac." And from this tale comes our saying "a Barmecide's Feast," <em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> an illusion. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-683" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-684" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Castrato at the door is still (I have said,) the fashion of Cairo and he acts "Suisse" with a witness. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-684" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-685" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As usual in the East, the mansion was a hollow square surrounding what in Spain is called <em><span xml:lang="es">Patio</span></em>: the outer entrance was far from the inner, showing the extent of the grounds. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-685" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-686" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Nahnu málihín"=we are on terms of salt, said and say the Arabs. But the traveller must not trust in these days to the once sacred tie; there are tribes which will give bread with one hand and stab with the other. The Eastern use of salt is a curious contrast with that of Westerns, who made it an invidious and inhospitable distinction, <em><abbr title="exempli gratia">e.g.</abbr></em> to sit above the salt-cellar and below the salt. Amongst the ancients, however, "he took bread and salt" means he swore, the food being eaten when an oath was taken. Hence the "Bride cake" of salt, water and flour. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-686" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-687" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Harísah," the meat-pudding before explained. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-687" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-688" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Sikbáj," before explained; it is held to be a lordly dish, invented by Khusraw Parwiz. "Fatted duck" says the Bresl. <abbr title="Edition">Edit.</abbr> ii. 308, with more reason. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-688" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-689" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I was reproved in Southern Abyssinia for eating without this champing, "Thou feedest like a beggar who muncheth silently in his corner;" and presently found that it was a sign of good breeding to eat as noisily as possible. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-689" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-690" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Barley in Arabia is, like our oats, food for horses: it fattens at the same time that it cools them. Had this been known to our cavalry when we first occupied Egypt in 1883-4 our losses in horse-flesh would have been far less; but official ignorance persisted in feeding the cattle upon heated oats and the riders upon beef, which is indigestible, instead of mutton, which is wholesome. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-690" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-691" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> "I conjure thee by God." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-691" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-692" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> "This is the very thing for thee." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-692" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-693" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em>, at random. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-693" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-694" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is the way of slaughtering the camel, whose throat is never cut on account of the thickness of the muscles. "Égorger un chameau" is a mistake often made in French books. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-694" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-695" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em><abbr title="id est">i.e.</abbr></em> I will break bounds. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-695" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-696" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Arabs have a saying corresponding with the dictum of the Salernitan school:—</p>
					<div class="c016 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">
									<span xml:lang="la">Noscitur a labiis quantum sit virginis antrum:</span>
								</div>
								<div class="line"><span xml:lang="la">Noscitur a naso quanta sit hasta viro</span>;</div>
								<div class="line">(A maiden's mouth shows what's the make of her <em>chose</em>;</div>
								<div class="line">And man's mentule one knows by the length of his nose.)</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Whereto I would add:—</p>
					<div class="c016 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">And the eyebrows disclose how the lower wig grows.</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>The observations are purely empirical but, as far as my experience extends, correct. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-696" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-697" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr title="Arabic">Arab.</abbr> "Kahkahah," a very low proceeding. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-697" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-698" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Or "for every death there is a cause;" but the older Arabs had a saying corresponding with "Deus non fecit mortem." <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-698" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-699" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The King's barber is usually a man of rank for the best of reasons that he holds his Sovereign's life between his fingers. One of these noble Figaros in India married an English lady who was, they say, unpleasantly surprised to find out what were her husband's official duties. <a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-699" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-700" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Supplementary to note 2, p. 2, and note 2, p. 14, vol. i., I may add that "Shahrazad," in the Shams al-Loghat, is the P.N. of a King. L. Langlès (Les Voyages de Sindibâd Le Marin et La Ruse des Femmes, first appended to Savary's Grammar and reprinted 12mo. pp. 161 + 113, Imprimerie Royale, Paris, M.D.CCC.XIV) explains it by Le cyprès, la beauté de la ville; and he is followed by (A. de Biberstein) Kazimirski (Enis el-Djelis, Paris, Barrois, 1847). Ouseley (Orient. Collect.) makes Shahrzád=town-born; and others an Arabisation of Chehr-ázád (free of face, ingenuous of countenance) the petit nom of Queen Humay, for whom see the terminal Essay. The name of the sister, whom the Fihrist converts into a Kahramánah, or nurse, vulgarly written Dínár-zád, would=child of gold pieces, freed by gold pieces, or one who has no need of gold pieces: Dinzád=child of faith and Daynázád, proposed by Langlès, "free from debt(!)" I have adopted Macnaghten's Dunyazad. "Shahryar," which Scott hideously writes "Shier-ear," is translated by the Shams, King of the world, absolute monarch and the court of Anushirwan while the Burhán-i-Káti'a renders it a King of Kings, and P.N. of a town. Shahr-báz is also the P.N. of a town in Samarcand. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-700" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-701" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Malik," here used as in our story-books: "Pompey was a wise and powerful King" says the Gesta Romanorum. This King is, as will appear, a Regent or Governor under Harun al-Rashid. In the next tale he is Viceroy of Damascus, where he is also called "Sultan." <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-701" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-702" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Bul. Edit. gives the lines as follows:—</p>
					<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">The lance was his pen, and the hearts of his foes ✿ His paper, and dipped he in blood for ink;</div>
								<div class="line">Hence our sires entitled the spear Khattíyah, ✿ Meaning that withal man shall write, I think.</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>The pun is in "Khattíyah" which may mean a writer (feminine) and also a spear, from Khatt-Hajar, a tract in the province Al-Bahrayn (Persian Gulf), and Oman, where the best Indian bamboos were landed and fashioned into lances. Imr al-Kays (Mu'allakah v. 4.) sings of "our dark spears firmly wrought of Khattiyan cane;" Al-Busírí of "the brown lances of Khatt;" also see Lebid v. 50 and Hamásah pp. 26, 231: Antar notes the "Spears of Khatt" and "Rudaynian lances." Rudaynah is said to have been the wife of one Samhár, the Ferrara of lances; others make her the wife of Al-Ka'azab and hold Samhár to be a town in Abyssinia where the best weapons were manufactured. The pen is the Calamus or Kalam (reed cut for pen) of which the finest and hardest are brought from Java: they require the least nibbing. The rhetorical figure in the text is called Husn al-Ta'alíl, our ætiology; and is as admirable to the Arabs as it appears silly to us. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-702" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-703" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"He loves folk" is high praise, meaning something more than benevolence and beneficence. Like charity it covers a host of sins. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-703" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-704" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The sentence is euphuistic. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-704" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-705" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Rubb"=syrup a word Europeanised by the "Rob Laffecteur." <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-705" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-706" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Septentriones or four oxen and their wain. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-706" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-707" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The list fatally reminds us of "astronomy and the use of the globes" ... "Shakespeare and the musical glasses." <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-707" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-708" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The octave occurs in Night xv. I quote Torrens (p. 360) by way of variety. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-708" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-709" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A courteous formula of closing with the offer. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-709" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-710" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>To express our "change of climate" Easterns say, "change of water and air," water coming first. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-710" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-711" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night" (Psalm cxxi. 6). Easterns still believe in the blighting effect of the moon's rays, which the Northerners of Europe, who view it under different conditions, are pleased to deny. I have seen a hale and hearty Arab, after sitting an hour in the moonlight, look like a man fresh from a sick bed; and I knew an Englishman in India whose face was temporarily paralysed by sleeping with it exposed to the moon. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-711" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-712" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The negroids and negroes of Zanzibar. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-712" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-713" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> Why not make thy heart as soft as thy sides! The converse of this was reported at Paris during the Empire, when a man had by mistake pinched a very high personage: "Ah, Madame! if your heart be as hard as (what he had pinched) I am a lost man." <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-713" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-714" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Na'íman" is said to one after bathing or head-shaving: the proper reply, for in the East every sign of ceremony has its countersign, is "Allah benefit thee!" (Pilgrimage i. <span class="fss">II</span>, iii. 285; Lane M. E. chapt. viii.; Caussin de Perceval's Arabic Grammar, etc., etc.). I have given a specimen (Pilgrimage i., 122) not only of sign and countersign, but also of the rhyming repartee which rakes love. Hanien! (pleasant to thee! said when a man drinks). Allah pleasure thee (Allah yuhanník which Arnauts and other ruffians perverted to Allah yaník, Allah copulate with thee); thou drinkest for <em>ten</em>!—I am the cock and thou art the <em>hen</em>! (<em>i.e.</em> a passive catamite)—Nay, I am the thick one (the penis which gives pleasure) and thou art the <em>thin</em>! And so forth with most unpleasant pleasantries. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-714" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-715" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the old version she is called "The Fair Persian," probably from the owner: her name means "The Cheerer of the Companion." <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-715" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-716" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pronounce "Nooraddeen." I give the name as written in Arabic. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-716" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-717" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Amongst Moslems, I have said, it is held highly disgraceful when the sound of women's cries can be heard by outsiders. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-717" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-718" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In a case like this, the father would be justified by Rasm (or usage) not by Koranic law, in playing Brutus with his son. The same would be the case in a detected intrigue with a paternal concubine and, in very strict houses, with a slave-girl. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-718" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-719" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Orientals fear the "Zug" or draught as much as Germans; and with even a better reason. Draughts are most dangerous in hot climates. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-719" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-720" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Unity of the Godhead and the Apostleship of Mohammed. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-720" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-721" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This would be done only in the case of the very poor. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-721" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-722" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Prayers over the dead are not universal in Al-Islam; but when they are recited they lack the "sijdah" or prostration. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-722" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-723" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Or, "Of the first and the last," <em>i.e.</em> Mohammed, who claimed (and claimed justly) to be the "Seal" or head and end of all Prophets and Prophecy. For note that whether the Arab be held inspired or a mere impostor, no man making the same pretension has moved the world since him. Mr. J. Smith the Mormon (to mention one in a myriad) made a bold attempt and failed. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-723" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-724" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> flatterers. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-724" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-725" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In one matter Moslems contrast strongly with Christians, by most scrupulously following the example of their law-giver: hence they are the model Conservatives. But (European) Christendom is here, as in other things, curiously contradictory: for instance, it still keeps a "Feast of the Circumcision," and practically holds circumcision in horror. Eastern Christians, however, have not wholly abolished it, and the Abyssinians, who find it a useful hygienic precaution, still practise it. For ulcers, syphilis and other venereals which are readily cured in Egypt become dangerous in the Highlands of Ethiopia. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-725" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-726" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Sabab," the orig. and material sense of the word; hence "a cause," etc. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-726" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-727" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thus he broke his promise to his father, and it is insinuated that retribution came upon him. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-727" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-728" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"O Pilgrim" (Ya Hájj) is a polite address even to those who have not pilgrimaged. The feminine "Hájjah" (in Egypt pronounced "Hággeh") is similarly used. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-728" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-729" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. usúl=roots, <em>i.e.</em> I have not forgotten my business. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-729" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-730" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Moslems from Central and Western North Africa. (Pilgrimage i. 261; iii. 7, etc.); the "Jabarti" is the Moslem Abyssinian. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-730" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-731" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is a favourite bit of chaff and is to be lengthened out almost indefinitely <em>e.g.</em> every brown thing is not civet nor every shining thing a diamond; every black thing is not charcoal nor every white chalk; every red thing is not a ruby nor every yellow a topaz; every long-necked thing is not a camel, etc., etc., etc. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-731" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-732" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He gives him the name of his grandfather; a familiar usage. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-732" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-733" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Ma'janah," a place for making unbaked bricks (Tob=Span. Adobe) with chaff and bruised or charred straw. The use of this article in rainless lands dates from ages immemorial, and formed the outer walls of the Egyptian temple. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-733" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-734" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Barsh," a bit of round matting used by the poor as a seat. The Wazir thus showed that he had been degraded to the condition of a mat-maker. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-734" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-735" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The growth (a <em>Poa</em> of two species) which named Wady Halfá (vulg. "Halfah"), of which the home public has of late heard perhaps a trifle too much. Burckhardt (Prov. 226) renders it "dry reeds"—incorrectly enough. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-735" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-736" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This "Háshimi" vein, as they call it, was an abnormal development between the eyes of the house of Abbas, inherited from the great grandfather of the Prophet; and the latter had it remarkably large, swelling in anger and battle-rage. The text, however, may read "The sweat of wrath," etc. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-736" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-737" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Torrens and Payne prefer "Ilm"=knowledge. Lane has more correctly "Alam"=a sign, a flag. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-737" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-738" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The lines were in Night xi: I have quoted Torrens (p. 379) for a change. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-738" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-739" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Still customary in Tigris-Euphrates land, where sea-craft has not changed since the days of Xisisthrus-Noah, and long before. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-739" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-740" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>To cool the contents. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-740" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-741" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hence the Khedivial Palace near Cairo "Kasr al-Nuzhah;" literally "of Delights;" one of those flimsy new-Cairo buildings which contrast so marvellously with the architecture of ancient and even of mediæval Egypt, and which are covering the land with modern ruins. Compare Mohammed Ali's mosque in the citadel with the older Sultan Hasan. A popular tale is told that, when the conquering Turk, Yáwúz Sultan Selim, first visited Cairo, they led him to Mosque Al-Ghúri. "This is a splendid Ká'ah (saloon)!" quoth he. When he entered Sultan Hasan, he exclaimed, "This is a citadel!"; but after inspecting the Mosque Al-Mu'ayyad he cried, "'Tis a veritable place of prayer, a fit stead for the Faithful to adore the Eternal!" <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-741" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-742" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. gardeners are very touchy on this point. A friend of mine was on a similar occasion addressed, in true Egyptian lingo, by an old Adam-son, "Ya ibn al-Kalb! beta'mil ay?" (O dog-son, what art thou up to?). <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-742" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-743" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"The green palm-stick is of the trees of Paradise;" say the Arabs in Solomonic style but not Solomonic words: so our "Spare the rod," etc. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-743" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-744" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wayfarers, travellers who have a claim on the kindness of those at home: hence Abd al-Rahman al-Burai sings in his famous Ode:—</p>
					<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">He hath claim on the dwellers in the places of their birth,</div>
								<div class="line">Whoso wandereth the world, for he lacketh him a home.</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>It is given in my "First Footsteps in East Africa" (pp. 53-55). <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-744" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-745" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The good old man treated the youth like a tired child. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-745" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-746" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Moslem writings the dove and turtle-dove are mostly feminine, whereas the female bird is always mute and only the male sings to summon or to amuse his mate. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-746" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-747" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An unsavoury comparison of the classical Narcissus with the yellow white of a nigger's eyes. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-747" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-748" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A tree whose coals burn with fierce heat: Al-Hariri (Vth Séance). This Artemisia is like the tamarisk but a smaller growth and is held to be a characteristic of the Arabian Desert. A Badawi always hails with pleasure the first sight of the Ghazá, after he has sojourned for time away from his wilds. Mr. Palgrave (i. 38) describes the "Ghadá" as an Euphorbia with a woody stem often 5-6 feet high and slender flexible green twigs (?), "forming a feathery tuft, not ungraceful to the eye, while it affords some shelter to the traveller, and food to his camels." <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-748" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-749" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. Sal'am=S(alla) A(llah) a(layhi) wa S(allam); A(llah) b(less) h(im) a(nd) k(eep)=Allah keep him and assain! <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-749" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-750" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The ass is held to be ill-omened. I have noticed the braying elsewhere. According to Mandeville the Devil did not enter the Ark with the Ass, but he left it when Noah said "Benedicite." In his day (A.D. 1322) and in that of Benjamin of Tudela, people had seen and touched the ship on Ararat, the Judi (Gordiæi) mountains; and this dates from Berosus (S.C. 250) who, of course, refers to the Ark of Xisisthrus. See Josephus Ant. i. 3, 6; and Rodwell (Koran, pp. 65, 530). <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-750" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-751" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As would happen at a "Zikr," rogation or litany. Those who wish to see how much can be made of the subject will read "Pearls of the Faith, or Islam's Rosary, being the ninety-nine beautiful names of Allah" (Asmá-el-Husna) etc. by Edwin Arnold: London. Trübner, 1883. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-751" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-752" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> the Sáki, cup-boy or cup-bearer. "Moon-faced," as I have shown elsewhere, is no compliment in English, but it is in Persian and Arabic. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-752" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-753" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He means we are "Záhirí," plain honest Moslems, not "Bátiní" gnostics (<span xml:lang="la">ergò reprobates</span>) and so forth, who disregard all appearances and external ordinances. This suggests his opinion of Shaykh Ibrahim and possibly refers to Ja'afar's suspected heresy. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-753" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-754" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This worthy will be noticed in a subsequent page. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-754" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-755" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Lisám," the end of the "Kúfiyah," or head-kerchief passed over the face under the eyes and made fast on the other side. This mouth-veil serves as a mask (eyes not being recognisable) and defends from heat, cold and thirst. I also believe that hooding the eyes with this article, Badawi-fashion, produces a sensation of coolness, at any rate a marked difference of apparent temperature; somewhat like a pair of dark spectacles or looking at the sea from a sandy shore. Pilgrimage i., 210 and 346. The woman's "Lisám" (chin-veil) or Yashmak is noticed in i., 337. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-755" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-756" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Most characteristic is this familiarity between the greatest man then in the world and his pauper subject. The fisherman alludes to a practise of Al-Islam, instituted by Caliph Omar, that all rulers should work at some handicraft in order to spare the public treasure. Hence Sultan Mu'ayyad of Cairo was a calligrapher who sold his handwriting, and his example was followed by the Turkish Sultans Mahmúd, Abd al-Majíd and Abd al-Aziz. German royalties prefer carpentering and Louis XVI. watch-making. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-756" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-757" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There would be nothing singular in this request. The democracy of despotism levels all men outside the pale of politics and religion. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-757" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-758" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Wa'lláhi tayyib!" an exclamation characteristic of the Egyptian Moslem. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-758" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-759" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The pretended fisherman's name Karím=the Generous. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-759" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-760" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Such an act of generosity would appear to Europeans well-nigh insanity, but it is quite in Arab manners. Witness the oft-quoted tale of Hátim and his horse. As a rule the Arab is the reverse of generous, contrasting badly, in this point, with his cousin the Jew: hence his ideal of generosity is of the very highest. "The generous (<em>i.e.</em> liberal) is Allah's friend, aye, though he be a sinner; and the miser is Allah's foe, aye, though he be a saint!" Indian Moslems call a skin-flint Makhi-chús=fly-sucker (Pilgrimage i. 242). <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-760" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-761" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. Ammá ba'ad (or Wa ba'ad), an initiatory formula attributed to Koss ibn Sa'idat al-Iyadi, bishop of Najrán (the town in Al-Yaman which D'Herbelot calls Negiran and a famous preacher in Mohammed's day) hence "more eloquent than Koss" (Maydáni, Arab. Prov., 189). He was the first who addressed letters with the incept, "from A. to B."; and the first who preached from a pulpit and who leant on a sword or a staff when discoursing. Many Moslems date Ammá ba'ad from the Prophet David, relying upon a passage of the Koran (xxxviii. 19). <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-761" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-762" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Nusf"=half (a dirham): vulgarly pronounced "nuss," and synonymous with the Egypt. "Faddah" (=silver), the Greek Asper, and the Turkish "paráh." It is the smallest Egyptian coin, made of very base metal and, there being forty to the piastre, it is worth nearly a quarter of a farthing. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-762" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-763" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The too literal Torrens and Lane make the Caliph give the gardener-lad the clothes in which he was then clad, forgetting, like the author or copier, that he wore the fishermen's lousy suit. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-763" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-764" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In sign of confusion, disappointment and so forth: not "biting his nails," which is European and utterly un-Asiatic. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-764" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-765" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See lines like these in Night xiii. (i. 136); the sentiment is trite. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-765" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-766" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Arab will still stand under his ruler's palace and shout aloud to attract his attention. Sayyid Sa'id known as the "Imán of Muskat" used to encourage the patriarchal practice. Mohammed repeatedly protested against such unceremonious conduct (Koran xciv. 11, etc.). The "three times of privacy" (Koran cv. 57) are before the dawn prayer, during the Siesta (noon) and after the even-prayer. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-766" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-767" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Judges of the four orthodox schools. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-767" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-768" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>That none might see it or find it ever after. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-768" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-769" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Khatt Sharif"=a royal autographical letter: the term is still preserved in Turkey, but Europeans will write "Hatt." <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-769" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-770" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Meaning "Little tom-cat"; a dim. of "Kitt" vulg. Kutt or Gutt. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-770" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-771" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Matmúrah"—the Algerine "Matamor"—a "silo," made familiar to England by the invention of "Ensilage." <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-771" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-772" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The older "Mustapha"=Mohammed. This Intercession-doctrine is fiercely disputed. Pilgrimage ii. 77. The Apostle of Al-Islam seems to have been unable to make up his mind upon the subject: and modern opinion amongst Moslems is apparently borrowed from the Christians. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-772" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-773" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lane (i. 486) curiously says, "The place of the stagnation of blood:" yet he had translated the word aright in the Introduction (i. 41). I have noticed that the Nat'a is made like the "Sufrah," of well-tanned leather, with rings in the periphery, so that a thong passed through turns it into a bag. The Sufrah used for provisions is usually yellow, with a black border and small pouches for knives or spoons (Pilgrimage i. 111). <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-773" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-774" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This improbable detail shows the Caliph's greatness. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-774" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-775" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Cousin" is here a term of familiarity, our "coz." <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-775" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-776" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> without allowing them a moment's delay to change clothes. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-776" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-777" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> according to my nature, birth, blood, <em>de race</em>. <a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-777" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-778" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Our "Job." The English translators of the Bible, who borrowed Luther's system of transliteration (of A.D. 1522), transferred into English the German "j" which has the sound of "i" or "y"; intending us to pronounce Yacob (or Yakob), Yericho, Yimnites, Yob (or Hiob) and Yudah. Tyndall who copied Luther (A.D. 1525-26), preserved the true sound by writing Iacob, Ben Iamin and Iudas. But his successors unfortunately returned to the German; the initial I having from the xiii. century been ornamentally lengthened and bent leftwards became a consonant; the public adopted the vernacular sound of "j" (dg) and hence our language and our literature are disgraced by such barbarisms as "Jehovah" and "Jesus"—Dgehovah and Dgeesus for Yehovah and Yesus. Future generations of school-teachers may remedy the evil; meanwhile we are doomed for the rest of our days to hear</p>
					<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">Gee-rusalem! Gee-rusalem! etc.</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Nor is there one word to be said in favour of the corruption except that, like the Protestant mispronunciation of Latin and the Erasmian ill-articulation of Greek, it has become "English," and has lent its little aid in dividing the Britons from the rest of the civilised world. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-778" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-779" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The moon, I repeat, is masculine in the so-called "Semitic" tongues. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-779" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-780" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> camel-loads about lbs. 300; and for long journeys lbs. 250. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-780" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-781" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Janázah," so called only when carrying a corpse; else Na'ash, Sarír or Tábút: Irán being the large hearse on which chiefs are borne. It is made of plank or stick-work; but there are several varieties (Lane, M. E. chapt. xxviii). <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-781" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-782" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is meritorious to accompany the funeral cortège of a Moslem even for a few paces. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-782" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-783" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Otherwise he could not have joined in the prayers. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-783" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-784" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Halwá" made of sugar, cream, almonds, etc. That of Maskat is famous throughout the East. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-784" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-785" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> "Camphor" to a negro as we say "Snowball," by the figure antiphrase. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-785" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-786" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Little Good Luck," a dim. form of "bakht"=luck, a Persian word naturalized in Egypt. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-786" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-787" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There are, as I have shown, not a few cannibal tribes in Central Africa and these at times find their way into the slave market. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-787" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-788" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> After we bar the door. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-788" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-789" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Jáwísh" from Turk. Cháwúsh, Chiaoosh, a sergeant, poursuivant, royal messenger. I would suggest that this is the word "Shálish" or "Jálish" in Al-Siyúti's History of the Caliphs (p. 501) translated by Carlyle "milites," by Schultens "Sagittarius" and by Jarett "picked troops." <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-789" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-790" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This familiarity with blackamoor slave-boys is common in Egypt and often ends as in the story: Egyptian blood is sufficiently mixed with negro to breed inclination for miscegenation. But here the girl was wickedly neglected by her mother at such an age as ten. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-790" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-791" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Farj"; hence a facetious designation of the other sex is "Zawi'l-furuj" (grammatically Zawátu'l-furúj)=habentes rimam, slit ones. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-791" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-792" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This ancient and venerable practice of inspecting the marriage-sheet is still religiously preserved in most parts of the East; and in old-fashioned Moslem families it is publicly exposed in the Harem to prove that the "domestic calamity" (the daughter) went to her husband a clean maid. Also the general idea is that no blood will impose upon the experts, or jury of matrons, except that of a pigeon-poult which exactly resembles hymeneal blood—when not subjected to the microscope. This belief is universal in Southern Europe and I have heard of it in England. Further details will be given in Night ccxi. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-792" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-793" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Agha" Turk.=sir, gentleman, is, I have said, politely addressed to a eunuch. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-793" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-794" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As Bukhayt tells us he lost only his testes, consequently his <em>erectio et distensio penis</em> was as that of a boy before puberty and it would last as long as his heart and circulation kept sound. Hence the eunuch who preserves his penis is much prized in the Zenanah where some women prefer him to the entire man, on account of his long performance of the deed of kind. Of this more in a future page. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-794" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-795" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is or rather was the custom in Egypt and Syria to range long rows of fine China bowls along the shelves running round the rooms at the height of six or seven feet, and they formed a magnificent cornice. I bought many of them at Damascus till the people, learning their value, asked prohibitive prices. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-795" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-796" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The tale is interesting as well as amusing, excellently describing the extravagances still practised in middle-class Moslem families on the death of the pater familias. I must again note that Arab women are much more unwilling to expose the back of the head covered by the "Tarhah" (head-veil) than the face, which is hidden by the "Burka" or nose-bag. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-796" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-797" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The usual hysterical laughter of this nervous race. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-797" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-798" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here the slave refuses to be set free and starve. For a master so to do without ample reason is held disgraceful. I well remember the weeping and wailing throughout Sind when an order from Sir Charles Napier set free the negroes whom British philanthropy thus doomed to endure if not to die of hunger. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-798" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-799" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Manumission, which is founded upon Roman law, is an extensive subject discussed in the Hidáyah and other canonical works. The slave here lays down the law incorrectly, but his claim shows his truly "nigger" impudence. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-799" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-800" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is quite true to nature. The most remarkable thing in the wild central African is his enormous development of "destructiveness." At Zanzibar I never saw a slave break a glass or plate without a grin or a chuckle of satisfaction. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-800" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-801" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Khassá-ni"; Khusyatáni (vulg.) being the testicles, also called "bayzatán" (the two eggs) a <em>double entendre</em> which has given rise to many tales. For instance in the witty Persian book "Dozd o Kazi" (The Thief and the Judge) a footpad strips the man of learning and offers to return his clothes if he can ask him a puzzle in law or religion. The Kazi (in folk-lore mostly a fool) fails, and his wife bids him ask the man to supper for a trial of wits on the same condition. She begins with compliments and ends by producing five eggs which she would have him distribute equally amongst the three; and, when he is perplexed, she gives one to each of the men taking three for herself. Whereupon the "Dozd" wends his way, having lost his booty as his extreme stupidity deserved. In the text the eunuch, Kafur, is made a "Sandali" or smooth-shaven, so that he was of no use to women. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-801" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-802" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Khara," the lowest possible word: Yá Khara! is the commonest of insults, used also by modest women. I have heard one say it to her son. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-802" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-803" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Kámah," a measure of length, a fathom, also called "Bá'a." Both are omitted in that sadly superficial book, Lane's Modern Egyptians, App. B. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-803" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-804" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Names of her slave-girls which mean (in order), Garden-bloom, Dawn (or Beautiful), Tree o' Pearl (P. N. of Saladin's wife), Light of (right) Direction, Star o' the Morn, Lewdness (=Shahwah, I suppose this is a chaff), Delight, Sweetmeat and Miss Pretty. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-804" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-805" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This mode of disposing of a rival was very common in Harems. But it had its difficulties and on the whole the river was (and is) preferred. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-805" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-806" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An Eastern dislikes nothing more than drinking in a dim dingy place: the brightest lights seem to add to his "drinkitite." <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-806" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-807" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He did not sleep with her because he suspected some palace-mystery which suggested prudence, she also had her reasons. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-807" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-808" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is called in Egypt "Aslah" (Lane M. E. chapt. i.). <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-808" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-809" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It would be a broad ribbon-like band upon which the letters could be worked. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-809" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-810" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the Arab. "<em>he</em> cried." These "Yes, Yes! and No! No!" trifles are very common amongst the Arabs. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-810" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-811" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Maragha" lit. rubbed his face on them like a fawning dog. Ghanim is another "softy" lover, a favourite character in Arab tales; and by way of contrast, the girl is masterful enough. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-811" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-812" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Because the Abbaside Caliphs descend from Al-Abbas paternal uncle of Mohammed. The text means more explicitly, "O descendant of the Prophet's uncle!" <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-812" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-813" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The most terrible part of a <em>belle passion</em> in the East is that the beloved will not allow her lover leave of absence for an hour. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-813" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-814" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is hard to preserve these wretched puns. In the original we have "O spray" (or branch) of capparis-shrub (<em>aráki</em>) which has been thinned of leaf and fruit (<em>tujna</em>, <em>i.e.</em>, whose fruit, the hymen, has been plucked before and not by me) I see thee (<em>aráka</em>) against me sinning (<em>tajní</em>). <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-814" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-815" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apparently the writer forgets that the Abbaside banners and dress were black, originally a badge of mourning for the Imám Ibrahim bin Mohammed put to death by the Ommiade Caliph Al-Marwán. The modern Egyptian mourning, like the old Persian, is indigo-blue of the darkest; but, as before noted, the custom is by no means universal. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-815" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-816" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Koran, chapt. iv. In the East as elsewhere the Devil quotes Scripture. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-816" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-817" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A servant returning from a journey shows his master due honour by appearing before him in travelling suit and uncleaned. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-817" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-818" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The first name means "Rattan"; the second "Willow-wand," from the "Bán" or "Khiláf" the Egyptian willow (<em>Salix Ægyptiaca</em> Linn.) vulgarly called "Safsáf." Forskal holds the "Bán" to be a different variety. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-818" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-819" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Ta'ám," which has many meanings: in mod. parlance it would signify millet, holcus-seed. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-819" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-820" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> "I well know how to deal with him." <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-820" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-821" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Pen (title of the Koranic chapt. lxviii.) and the Preserved Tablet (before explained). <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-821" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-822" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These plunderings were sanctioned by custom. But a few years ago, when the Turkish soldiers mutinied about arrears of pay (often delayed for years) the governing Páshá would set fire to the town and allow the men to loot what they pleased during a stated time. Rochet (<em>soi-disant</em> D'Héricourt) amusingly describes this manœuvre of the Turkish Governor of Al-Hodaydah in the last generation (Pilgrimage iii. 381). <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-822" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-823" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Another cenotaph whose use was to enable women to indulge in their pet pastime of weeping and wailing in company. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-823" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-824" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The lodging of pauper travellers, as the chapel in Iceland is of the wealthy. I have often taken benefit of the mosque, but as a rule it is unpleasant, the matting being not only torn but over-populous. Juvenal seems to allude to the Jewish Synagogue similarly used:—"in quâ te quæro proseuchâ"? (iii. 296) and in Acts iii. we find the lame, blind and impotent in the Temple-porch. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-824" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-825" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This foul sort of vermin is supposed to be bred by perspiration. It is an epoch in the civilised traveller's life when he catches his first louse. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-825" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-826" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Moslem peasant is a kind-hearted man and will make many sacrifices for a sick stranger even of another creed. It is a manner of "pundonor" with the village. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-826" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-827" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Such treatment of innocent women was only too common under the Caliphate and in contemporary Europe. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-827" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-828" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This may also mean, "And Heaven will reward thee;" but camel-men do not usually accept any drafts upon futurity. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-828" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-829" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He felt that he was being treated like a corpse. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-829" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-830" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This hatred of the Hospital extends throughout Southern Europe, even in places where it is not justified. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-830" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-831" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The importance of the pillow (wisádah or makhaddah) to the sick man is often recognised in The Nights. "He took to his pillow" is=took to his bed. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-831" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-832" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> in order that the reverend men, who do not render such suit and service gratis, might pray for him. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-832" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-833" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The reader will notice in The Nights the frequent mention of these physical prognostications, with which mesmerists are familiar. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-833" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-834" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Pers. name of the planet Saturn in the Seventh Heaven. Arab. "Zuhal"; the Kiun or Chiun of Amos vi. 26. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-834" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-835" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> "Pardon me if I injured thee"—a popular phrase. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-835" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-836" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A "seduction," a charmer. The double-entendre has before been noticed. <a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-836" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-837" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This knightly tale, the longest in the Nights (xliv-cxlv.), about one-eighth of the whole, does not appear in the Bres. Edit. Lane, who finds it "objectionable," reduces it to two of its episodes, Aziz-cum-Azízah and Táj al-Mulúk. On the other hand it has been converted into a volume (8vo, pp. 240) "Scharkan, Conte Arabe;" etc. Traduit par M. Asselan Riche, etc. Paris: Dondey-Dupré. 1829. It has its <em>longueurs</em> and at times is longsome enough; but it is interesting as a comparison between the chivalry of Al-Islam and European knight-errantry. Although all the characters are fictitious the period is evidently in the early crusading days. Cæsarea, the second capital of Palestine, taken during the Caliphate of Omar (A.H. 19) and afterwards recovered, was fortified in A.H. 353=963 as a base against the Arabs by the Emperor Phocas, the Arab. "Nakfúr" <em>i.e.</em> Nicephorus. In A.H. 498=1104, crusading craft did much injury by plundering merchantmen between Egypt and Syria, to which allusion is found in the romance. But the story-teller has not quite made up his mind about which Cæsarea he is talking, and M. Riche tells us that Césarée is a "ville de la Mauritanie, en Afrique" (p. 20). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-837" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-838" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The fifth Ommiade Caliph reign. A.H. 65-86=685-704. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-838" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-839" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This does not merely mean that no one was safe from his wrath: or, could approach him in the heat of fight: it is a reminiscence of the masterful "King Kulayb," who established game-laws in his dominions and would allow no man to approach his camp-fire. Moreover the Jinn lights a fire to decoy travellers; but if his victim be bold enough to brave him, he invites him to take advantage of the heat. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-839" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-840" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>China. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-840" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-841" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Jaxartes and the Bactrus (names very loosely applied). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-841" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-842" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In full "Sharrun kána" <em>i.e.</em> an evil (Sharr) has come to being (kána), that is, "bane to the foe"—a pagan and knightly name. The hero of the Romance "Al-Dalhamah" is described as a bitter gourd (colocynth), a viper, a calamity. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-842" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-843" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is a Moslem law (Koran chapt. iv. bodily borrowed from the Talmud) which does not allow a man to marry one wife unless he can carnally satisfy her. Moreover he must distribute his honours equally and each wife has a right to her night unless she herself give it up. This was the case even with the spouses of the Prophet; and his biography notices several occasions when his wives waived their rights in favour of one another. M. Riche kindly provides the King with <i><span xml:lang="fr">la piquante française</span></i> (p. 15). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-843" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-844" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>So the celebrated mosque in Stambul, famed for being the largest church in the world, is known to the Greeks as "Agia (pron. Aya) Sophia" and to Moslems as "Aya Sofíyeh" (Holy Wisdom) <em>i.e.</em> the Logos or Second Person of the Trinity (not a Saintess). The sending a Christian girl as a present to a Moslem would, in these days be considered highly scandalous. But it was done by the Mukaukis or Coptic Governor of Egypt (under Heraclius) who of course hated the Greeks. This worthy gave two damsels to Mohammed, one called Sírín and the other Máriyah (Maria) whom the Prophet reserved for his especial use and whose abode is still shown at Al-Medinah. The Rev. Doctor Badger (loc. cit. p. 972) gives the translation of an epistle by Mohammed to this Mukaukis, written in the Cufic character (??) and sealed "Mohammed, The Apostle of Allah." My friend seems to believe that it is an original, but upon this subject opinions will differ. It is, however, exceedingly interesting, beginning with "Bismillah," etc., and ending (before the signature) with a quotation from the Koran (iii. 57); and may be assumed as a formula addressed to foreign potentates by a Prophet who had become virtually "King of Arabia." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-844" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-845" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This prayer before "doing the deed of kind" is, I have said, Moslem as well as Christian. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-845" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-846" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Exodus i. 16, quoted by Lane (M. E., chapt. xxvii.). Torrens in his Notes cites Drayton's "Moon-calf":—</p>
					<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">Bring forth the birth-stool—no, let it alone;</div>
								<div class="line">She is so far beyond all compass grown,</div>
								<div class="line">Some other new device us needs must stead,</div>
								<div class="line">Or else she never can be brought to bed.</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>It is the "groaning-chair" of Poor Robin's Almanac (1676) and we find it alluded to in Boccaccio, the classical sedile which according to scoffers has formed the papal chair (a curule seat) ever since the days of Pope Joan, when it has been held advisable for one of the Cardinals to ascertain that His Holiness possesses all the instruments of virility. This "Kursí al-wiládah" is of peculiar form on which the patient is seated. A most interesting essay might be written upon the various positions preferred during delivery, <em>e.g.</em> the wild Irish still stand on all fours, like the so-called "lower animals." Amongst the Moslems of Waday, etc., a cord is hung from the top of the hut, and the woman in labour holds on to it standing with her legs apart, till the midwife receives the child. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-846" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-847" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some Orientalists call "lullilooing" the trilling cry, which is made by raising the voice to its highest pitch and breaking it by a rapid succession of touches on the palate with the tongue-tip, others "Ziraleet" and Zagaleet, and one traveller tells us that it began at the marriage-festival of Isaac and Rebecca(!). Arabs term it classically Tahlíl and vulgarly Zaghrutah (Plur. Zaghárit) and Persians "Kil." Finally in Don Quixote we have "Lelilies," the battle-cry of the Moors (Duffield iii. 289). Dr. Buchanan likens it to a serpent uttering human sounds, but the good missionary heard it at the festival of Jagannath (Pilgrimage iii. 197). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-847" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-848" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> "Light of the Place" (or kingdom) and "Delight of the Age." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-848" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-849" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is utterly absurd to give the old heroic Persian name Afridun or Furaydun, the destroyer of Zohák or Zahhák, to a Greek, but such anachronisms are characteristic of The Nights and are evidently introduced on purpose. See Boccaccio, ix. 9. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-849" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-850" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Yunán" lit. Ionia, which applies to all Greece, insular and continental, especially to ancient Greece. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-850" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-851" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In 1870 I saw at Sidon a find of some hundreds of gold "Philippi" and "Alexanders." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-851" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-852" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. Riche has (p. 21):—<span xml:lang="fr">Ces talismans travaillés par le ciseau du célèbre</span> <em>Calfaziri</em>, adding in a note:—<span xml:lang="fr">Je pense que c'est un sculpteur Arabe</span>. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-852" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-853" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This periphrase, containing what seems to us a useless negative, adds emphasis in Arabic. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-853" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-854" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This bit of geographical information is not in the Bul. Edit. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-854" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-855" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Pers.=a tooth, the popular word. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-855" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-856" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This preliminary move, called in Persian Nakl-i-Safar, is generally mentioned. So the Franciscan monks in California, when setting out for a long journey through the desert, marched three times round the convent and pitched tents for the night under its walls. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-856" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-857" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Arab. "Khazinah" or "Khaznah" lit. a treasure, representing 1,000 "Kis" or purses (each=£5). The sum in the text is 7,000 purses × 5=£35,000. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-857" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-858" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Travellers often prefer such sites because they are sheltered from the wind, and the ground is soft for pitching tents; but many have come to grief from sudden torrents following rain. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-858" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-859" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Ghábah" not a forest in our sense of the word, but a place where water sinks and the trees (mostly Mimosas), which elsewhere are widely scattered, form a comparatively dense growth and collect in thickets. These are favourite places for wild beasts during noon-heats. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-859" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-860" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>At various times in the East Jews and Christians were ordered to wear characteristic garments, especially the Zunnár or girdle. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-860" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-861" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The description is borrowed from the Coptic Convent, which invariably has an inner donjon or keep. The oldest monastery in the world is Mar Antonios (St. Anthony the Hermit) not far from Suez (Gold Mines of Midian, p. 85). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-861" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-862" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Dawáhi," plur. of Dáhiyah=a mishap. The title means "Mistress of Misfortunes" or Queen of Calamities (to the enemy); and the venerable lady, as will be seen, amply deserved her name, which is pronounced Zát ad-Dawáhí. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-862" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-863" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Kunfuz"=hedgehog or porcupine. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-863" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-864" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These flowers of speech are mere familiarities, not insults. In societies where the sexes are separated speech becomes exceedingly free. Étourdie que vous êtes, says M. Riche, toning down the text. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-864" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-865" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Zirt," a low word. The superlative "Zarrát" (fartermost) or, "Abu Zirt" (Father of farts) is a facetious term among the bean-eating Fellahs and a deadly insult amongst the Badawin (Night ccccx.). The latter prefer the word Taggáa (Pilgrimage iii. 84). We did not disdain the word in farthingale=pet en air. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-865" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-866" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "kicked" him, <em>i.e.</em> with the sharp corner of the shovel-stirrup. I avoid such expressions as "spurring" and "pricking over the plain," because apt to give a wrong idea. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-866" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-867" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Allaho Akbar!" the classical Moslem slogan. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-867" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-868" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab horses are never taught to leap, so she was quite safe on the other side of a brook nine feet broad. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-868" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-869" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Batrík" (vulg. Bitrík)=patricius, a title given to Christian knights who commanded ten thousand men; the Tarkhan (or Nobb) heading four thousand, and the Kaumas (Arab. Káid) two hundred. It must not be confounded with Batrak (or Batrik)=patriarcha (Lane's Lex.). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-869" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-870" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Kázi al-Kuzát," a kind of Chief Justice or Chancellor. The office was established under the rule of Harun al-Rashid, who so entitled Abú Yúsuf Ya'akub al-Ansári: therefore the allusion is anachronistic. The same Caliph also caused the Olema to dress as they do still. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-870" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-871" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The allusion is Koranic: "O men, if ye be in doubt concerning the resurrection, consider that he first created you of the dust of the ground (Adam); afterwards of seed" (chapt. xxii.). But the physiological ideas of the Koran are curious. It supposes that the Mani or male semen is in the loins and that of women in the breast bone (chapt. lxxxvi.); that the mingled seed of the two (chapt. lxxvi.) fructifies the ovary and that the child is fed through the navel with menstruous blood, hence the cessation of the catamenia. Barzoi (Kalilah and Dímnah) says:—"Man's seed, falling into the woman's womb, is mixed with her seed and her blood: when it thickens and curdles the Spirit moves it and it turns about like liquid cheese; then it solidifies, its arteries are formed, its limbs constructed and its joints distinguished. If the babe is a male, his face is placed towards his mother's back; if a female, towards her belly. (P. 262, Mr. I. G. N. Keith-Falconer's translation.) But there is a curious prolepsis of the spermatozoa-theory. We read (Koran chapt. vii.), "Thy Lord drew forth their posterity from the loins of the sons of Adam;" and the commentators say that Allah stroked Adam's back and extracted from his loins all his posterity, which shall ever be, in the shape of small ants; these confessed their dependence on God and were dismissed to return whence they came." From this fiction it appears (says Sale) that the doctrine of pre-existence is not unknown to the Mohammedans; and there is some little conformity between it and the modern theory of <span xml:lang="la">generatio ex animalculis in semine marium</span>. The poets call this Yaum-i-Alast=the Day of Am-I-not (-your Lord)? which Sir William Jones most unhappily translated "Art thou not with thy Lord?" (Alasta bi Rabbi-kum); and they produce a grand vision of unembodied spirits appearing in countless millions before their Creator. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-871" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-872" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The usual preliminary of a wrestling bout. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-872" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-873" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Eastern wrestling this counts as a fair fall. So Ajax fell on his back with Ulysses on his breast (Iliad xxxii., 700, etc.). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-873" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-874" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>So biting was allowed amongst the Greeks in the <span xml:lang="el">ἀνακλινοπάλη</span>, the final struggle on the ground. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-874" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-875" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Supposed to be names of noted wrestlers. "Kayim" (not El-Kim as Torrens has it) is a term now applied to a juggler or "professor" of legerdemain who amuses people in the streets with easy tricks (Lane, M. E., chapt. xx.). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-875" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-876" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lit. "laughed in his face" which has not the unpleasant meaning it bears in English. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-876" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-877" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Abu riyáh"=a kind of child's toy. It is the "<span xml:lang="el">Ρόμβος</span>" of the Greeks, our "bull-roarer" well known in Australia and parts of Africa. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-877" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-878" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The people of the region south of the Caspian which is called "Sea of Daylam." It has a long history; for which see D'Herbelot, <em>s. v.</em> "Dilem." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-878" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-879" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Coptic convents in Egypt still affect these drawbridges over the keep-moat. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-879" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-880" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Koran iv., xxii. etc., meaning it is lawful to marry women taken in war after the necessary purification although their husbands be still living. This is not permitted with a free woman who is a True Believer. I have noted that the only concubine slave-girls mentioned in the Koran are these "captives possessed by the right hand." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-880" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-881" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Amazonian dame is a favourite in folk-lore and is an ornament to poetry from the Iliad to our modern day. Such heroines, apparently unknown to the Pagan Arabs, were common in the early ages of Al-Islam as Ockley and Gibbon prove, and that the race is not extinct may be seen in my Pilgrimage (iii. 55) where the sister of Ibn Rumi resolved to take blood revenge for her brother. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-881" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-882" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>And Solomon said, "O nobles, which of you will bring me her throne?" A terrible genius (<em>i.e.</em> an Ifrit of the Jinn named Dhakwan or the notorious Sakhr) said, "I will bring it unto thee before thou arise from thy seat (of justice); for I am able to perform it, and may be trusted" (Koran, xxvii. 38-39). Balkís or <em>Bilkís</em> (says the Durrat al-Ghawwás) daughter of Hozád bin Sharhabíl, twenty-second in the list of the rulers of Al-Yaman, according to some murdered her husband, and became, by Moslem ignorance, the Biblical "Queen of Sheba." The Abyssinians transfer her from Arabian Saba to Ethiopia and make her the mother by Solomon of Menelek, their proto-monarch; thus claiming for their royalties an antiquity compared with which all reigning houses in the world are of yesterday. The dates of the Tabábi'ah or Tobbas prove that the Bilkís of history ruled Al-Yaman in the early Christian era. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-882" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-883" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Fass," fiss or fuss; the gem set in a ring; also applied to a hillock rounded <em>en cabochon</em>. In The Nights it is used to signify "a fine gem." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-883" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-884" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This prominence of the glutæi muscles is always insisted upon, because it is supposed to promise well in a bedfellow. In Somali-land, where the people are sub-steatopygous, a rich young man, who can afford such luxury, will have the girls drawn up in line and choose her to wife who projects furthest behind. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-884" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-885" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The "bull" is only half mine. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-885" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-886" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A favourite Arab phrase, the "hot eye" is one full of tears. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-886" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-887" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> "Coral," coral branch; a favourite name for a slave-girl, especially a negress. It is the older "Morgiana." I do not see why Preston in Al-Hariri's "Makamah (Séance) of Singar" renders it pearls, because Golius gives "small pearls," when it is evidently "coral." Richardson (Dissert. xlviii.) seems to me justified in finding the Pari (fairy) Marjan of heroic Persian history reflected in the Fairy Morgain who carried off King Arthur after the battle of Camelon. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-887" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-888" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "'Ud Jalaki"=Jalak or Jalik being a poetical and almost obsolete name of Damascus. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-888" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-889" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The fountain in Paradise whose water shall be drunk with "pure" wine mixed and sealed with musk (for clay). It is so called because it comes from the "Sanam" (Sanima, to be high) boss or highest ridge of the Moslem Heaven (Koran lv. 78 and lxxxiii. 27). Mr. Rodwell says "it is conveyed to the highest apartments in the Pavilions of Paradise." (?) <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-889" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-890" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This "hysterical" temperament is not rare even amongst the bravest Arabs. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-890" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-891" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An idea evidently derived from the Æolipyla (olla animatoria) the invention of Hero Alexandrinus, which showed that the ancient Egyptians could apply the motive force of steam. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-891" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-892" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kuthayyir ibn Abi Jumah, a poet and far-famed Ráwí or Tale-reciter, mentioned by Ibn Kballikan: he lived at Al-Medinah and sang the attractions of one Azzah, hence his soubriquet Sáhib (lover of) Azzah. As he died in A.H. 105 (=726), his presence here is a gross anachronism: the imaginary Sharrkan flourished before the Caliphate of Abd al-Malik bin Marwán A.H. 65-86. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-892" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-893" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Jamíl bin Ma'amar, a poet and lover contemporary with Al-Kuthayyir. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-893" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-894" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Tafazzal," a word of frequent use in conversations="favour me," etc. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-894" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-895" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The word has a long history. From the Gr. <span xml:lang="el">στίμμι</span> or <span xml:lang="el">στίβι</span> is the Lat. stibium; while the Low-Latin "antimonium" and the Span. Althimod are by metathesis for Al-Ithmid. The dictionaries define the substance as a stone from which antimony is prepared; but the Arabs understand a semi-mythical mineral of yellow colour which enters into the veins of the eyes and gives them lynx-like vision. The famous Anz nicknamed Zarká (the blue-eyed) of Yamámah (Province) used it; and, according to some, invented Kohl. When her (protohistoric) tribe Jadis had destroyed all the rival race of Tasm, except Ribáh ibn Murrah; the sole survivor fled to the Tobba of Al-Yaman, who sent a host to avenge him. The king commanded his Himyarites to cut tree-boughs and use them as screens (again Birman wood). Zarká from her Utum, or peel-tower, saw the army three marches off and cried, "O folk, either trees or Himyar are coming upon you!" adding, in Rajaz verse:—</p>
					<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">I swear by Allah that trees creep onward, or that Himyar beareth somewhat which he draweth along!</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>She then saw a man mending his sandal. But Jadis disbelieved; Cassandra was slain and, when her eyes were cut out, the vessels were found full of Ithmid. Hence Al-Mutanabbi sang:</p>
					<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">"Sharper-sighted than Zarká of Jau" (Yamámah).</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>See C. de Perceval i. 101; Arab. Prov. i. 192; and Chenery (p. 381. The Assemblies of Al-Hariri; London, Williams and Norgate, 1867). I have made many enquiries into the true nature of Ithmid and failed to learn anything: on the Upper Nile the word is=Kohl. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-895" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-896" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The general colour of chessmen in the east, where the game is played on a cloth more often than a board. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-896" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-897" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Al-fil," the elephant=the French fol or fou and our bishop. I have derived "elephant" from Píl (old Persian, Sansk. Pilu) and Arab. Fil, with the article Al-Fil, whence the Greek <span xml:lang="el">ἐλέφας</span> the suffix—as being devoted to barbarous words as Obod-as (Al-Ubayd), Aretas (Al-Háris), etc. Mr. Isaac Taylor (The Alphabet i. 169), preserves the old absurdity of "eleph-ant or ox-like (!) beast of Africa." Prof. Sayce finds the word al-ab (two distinct characters) in line 3, above the figure of an (Indian) elephant, on the black obelisk of Nimrod Mound, and suggests an Assyrian derivation. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-897" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-898" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Shaukat" which may also mean the "pride" or "mainstay" (of the army). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-898" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-899" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lit. "smote him on the tendons of his neck." This is the famous shoulder-cut (Tawashshuh) which, with the leg-cut (Kalam), formed, and still forms, the staple of Eastern attack with the sword. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-899" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-900" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Dirás." Easterns do not thresh with flails. The material is strewed over a round and smoothed floor of dried mud in the open air and threshed by different contrivances. In Egypt the favourite is a chair-like machine called "Norag," running on iron plates and drawn by bulls or cows over the corn. Generally, however, Moslems prefer the old classical <span xml:lang="el">Τρίβολον</span>, the Tribulum of Virgil and Varro, a slipper-shaped sled of wood garnished on the sole with large-headed iron nails, or sharp fragments of flint or basalt. Thus is made the "Tibn" or straw, the universal hay of the East, which our machines cannot imitate. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-900" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-901" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These numbers appear to be grossly exaggerated, but they were possible in the days of sword and armour: at the battle of Saffayn the Caliph Ali is said to have cut down five hundred and twenty-three men in a single night. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-901" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-902" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Biká'a": hence the "Buka'ah" or Cœlesyria. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-902" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-903" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Richardson in his excellent dictionary (note 103) which modern priggism finds "unscientific," wonderfully derives this word from Arab. "Khattáf," a snatcher (<em>i.e.</em> of women), a ravisher. It is an evident corruption of "captivus" through Italian and French. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-903" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-904" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These periodical and fair-like visitations to convents are still customary; especially amongst the Christians of Damascus. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-904" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-905" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Camphor being then unknown. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-905" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-906" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The "wrecker" is known all over the world; and not only barbarians hold that ships driven ashore become the property of the shore. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-906" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-907" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Jokh": it is not a dictionary word, but the only term in popular use for European broadcloth. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-907" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-908" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The second person plural is used because the writer would involve the subjects of his correspondent in the matter. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-908" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-909" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This part of the phrase, which may seem unnecessary to the European, is perfectly intelligible to all Orientalists. You may read many an Eastern letter and <em>not</em> understand it. Compare Boccaccio iv. 1. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-909" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-910" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em>, he was greatly agitated. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-910" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-911" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In text "<em>Li-ajal al-Taudí'a</em>," for the purpose of farewelling, a low Egyptianism; emphatically a "Kalám wáti." (Pilgrimage iii. 330.) <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-911" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-912" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the Mac. Edit. Sharrkan speaks, a clerical error. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-912" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-913" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Farsakh (Germ. Stunde) a measure of time rather than distance, is an hour's travel or its equivalent, a league, a meile=three English stat. miles. The word is still used in Persia its true home, but not elsewhere. It is very old, having been determined as a lineal measure of distance by Herodotus (ii. 5 and 6; v. 53), who computes it at 30 furlongs (=furrow-lengths, 8 to the stat. mile). Strabo (xi.) makes it range from 40 to 60 stades (each=606 feet 9 inches); and even now it varies between 1500 to 6,000 yards. Captain Francklin (Tour to Persia) estimates it=about four miles. (Pilgrimage ii. 113.) <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-913" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-914" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Ashhab." Names of colours are few amongst semi-civilised peoples, but in Arabia there is a distinct word for every shade of horseflesh. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-914" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-915" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>She had already said to him "Thou art beaten in everything!" <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-915" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-916" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Showing that she was still a Christian. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-916" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-917" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is not Badawi sentiment: the honoratioren amongst wild people would scorn such foul play; but amongst the settled Arabs honour between men and women is unknown; and such "hocussing" would be held quite fair. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-917" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-918" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The table of wine, in our day, is mostly a japanned tray with glasses and bottles, saucers of pickles and fruits and, perhaps, a bunch of flowers and aromatic herbs. During the Caliphate the "wine-service" was on a larger scale. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-918" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-919" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here the "Bhang" (almost a generic term applied to hellebore, etc.) may be hyoscyamus or henbane. Yet there are varieties of Cannabis, such as the Dakha of South Africa, capable of most violent effect. I found the use of the drug well known to the negroes of the Southern United States and of the Brazil, although few of their owners had ever heard of it. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-919" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-920" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Amongst Moslems this is a reference to Adam who first "sinned against himself," and who therefore is called "Safíyu'llah," the Pure of Allah (Pilgrimage iii. 333). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-920" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-921" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Meaning, an angry, violent man. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-921" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-922" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Inshád," which may mean reciting the verse of another or improvising one's own. In Modern Egypt "Munshid" is the singer or reciter of poetry at Zikrs (Lane M. E. chapt. xxiv.). Here the verses are quite bad enough to be improvised by the hapless Princess. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-922" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-923" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The negro skin assumes this dust-colour in cold, fear, concupiscence and other mental emotions. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-923" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-924" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He compares her glance with the blade of a Yamani sword, a <em>lieu commun</em> of Eastern poetry. The weapons are famous in The Nights; but the best sword-cutlery came from Persia as the porcelain from China to Sana'á. Here, however, is especial allusion as to the sword "Samsam" or "Samsamah." It belonged to the Himyarite Tobba, Amru bin Ma'ad Kurb, and came into the hands of Harun al-Rashid. When the Emperor of the Greeks sent a present of superior sword-blades to him by way of a brave, the Caliph, in the presence of the Envoys, took "Samsam" in hand and cut the others in twain as if they were cabbages without the least prejudice to the edge of "Samsam." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-924" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-925" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This touch of pathos is truly Arab. So in the "Romance of Dalhamah" (Lane, M. E. xxiii.) the infant Gundubah sucks the breast of its dead mother and the King exclaims, "If she had committed this crime she would not be affording the child her milk after she was dead." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-925" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-926" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. Sadda'l-Aktár, a term picturesque enough to be preserved in English. "Sadd," I have said, is a wall or dyke, the term applied to the great dam of water-plants which obstructs the navigation of the Upper Nile, the lilies and other growths floating with the current from the (Victoria) Nyanza Lake. I may note that we need no longer derive from India the lotus-lily so extensively used by the Ancient Egyptians and so neglected by the moderns that it has well nigh disappeared. All the Central African basins abound in the Nymphæa and thence it found its way down the Nile-Valley. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-926" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-927" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Al-Marhúmah": equivalent to our "late lamented." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-927" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-928" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vulgarly pronounced "Mahmal," and by Egyptians and Turks "Mehmel." Lane (M. E. xxiv.) has figured this queenly litter and I have sketched and described it in my Pilgrimage (iii. 12). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-928" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-929" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For such fits of religious enthusiasm see my Pilgrimage (iii. 254). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-929" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-930" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Irák" (Mesopotamia) means "a level country beside the banks of a river." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-930" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-931" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Al-Kuds," or "Bayt al-Mukaddas," is still the popular name of Jerusalem, from the Heb. Yerushalaim ha-Kadushah (legend on shekel of Simon Maccabeus). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-931" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-932" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Follow the religion of Abraham" says the Koran (chapt. iii. 89). Abraham, titled "Khalílu'llah," ranks next in dignity to Mohammed, preceding Isa; I need hardly say that his tomb is not in Jerusalem nor is the tomb itself at Hebron ever visited. Here Moslems (soi disant) are allowed by the jealousies of Europe to close and conceal a place which belongs to the world, especially to Jews and Christians. The tombs, if they exist, lie in a vault or cave under the Mosque. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-932" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-933" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Abá, or Abá'ah, vulg. Abáyah, is a cloak of hair, goat's or camel's; too well known to require description. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-933" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-934" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Al-Wakkád;" the man who lights and keeps up the bath-fires. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-934" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-935" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Má al-Khaláf"(or "Khiláf") a sickly perfume but much prized, made from the flowers of the Salix Ægyptiaca. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-935" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-936" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Used by way of soap; like glasswort and other plants. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-936" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-937" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em>, "Thou art only just recovered." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-937" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-938" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>To "Nakh" is to gurgle "Ikh! Ikh!" till the camel kneels. Hence the space called "Barr al-Manákhah" in Al-Medinah (Pilgrimage i. 222, ii. 91). There is a regular camel-vocabulary amongst the Arabs, made up like our "Gee" (go ye!), etc. of significant words worn down. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-938" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-939" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Laza," the Second Hell provided for Jews. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-939" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-940" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The word has been explained (vol. i. 112). It is trivial, not occurring in the Koran which uses "Arabs of the Desert;" "Arabs who dwell in tents," etc. (chapt. ix. and xxxiii.). "A'arábi" is the classical word and the origin of "Arab" is disputed. According to Pocock (Notæ Spec. Hist. Arab.): "Diverse are the opinions concerning the denomination of the Arabs; but the most certain of all is that which draws it from Arabah, which is part of the region of Tehamah, (belonging to Al-Medinah, Pilgrimage ii. 118), which their father Ismail afterwards inhabited." Tehamah (tierra caliente) is the maritime region of Al-Hijaz, the Moslem's Holy Land; and its "Arabah," a very small tract which named a very large tract, must not be confounded, as some have done, with the Wady Arabah, the ancient outlet of the Dead Sea. The derivation of "Arab" from "Ya'arab" a fancied son of Joktan is mythological. In Heb. Arabia may be called "Eretz Ereb" (or "Arab")=land of the West; but in Arabic "Gharb" (not Ereb) is the Occident and the Arab dates long before the Hebrew. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-940" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-941" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"When thine enemy extends his hand to thee, cut it off if thou can, or kiss it," wisely said Caliph al-Mansúr. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-941" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-942" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Tartur was a peculiar turban worn by the Northern Arabs and shown in old prints. In modern Egypt the term is applied to the tall sugar-loaf caps of felt affected mostly by regular Dervishes. Burckhardt (Proverbs 194 and 398) makes it the high cap of felt or fur proper to the irregular cavalry called Dely or Delaty. In Dar For (Darfour) "Tartur" is a conical cap adorned with beads and cowries worn by the Manghwah or buffoon who corresponds with the Egyptian "Khalbús" or "Maskharah" and the Turkish "Sutari." For an illustration see Plate iv. fig. 10 of Voyage au Darfour par Mohammed El-Tounsy (The Tunisian), Paris, Duprat, 1845. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-942" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-943" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The term is picturesque and true; we say "gnaw" which is not so good. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-943" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-944" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here, meaning an Elder, a Chief, etc.; the word has been almost naturalised in English. I have noted that Abraham was the first "Shaykh." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-944" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-945" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This mention of weighing suggests the dust of Dean Swift and the money of the Gold Coast. It was done, I have said, because the gold coin, besides being "sweated" was soft and was soon worn down. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-945" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-946" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Fem. of Nájí (a deliverer, a saviour)=Salvadora. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-946" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-947" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This, I have noted, is according to Koranic command (chapt. iv. 88). "When you are saluted with a salutation, salute the person with a better salutation." The longer answer to "Peace be with (or upon) thee!" is still universally the custom. The "Salám" is so differently pronounced by every Eastern nation that the observant traveller will easily make of it a Shibboleth. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-947" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-948" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Badawi, who was fool as well as rogue, begins to fear that he has kidnapped a girl of family. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-948" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-949" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These examinations being very indecent are usually done in strictest privacy. The great point is to make sure of virginity. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-949" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-950" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is according to strict Moslem law: the purchaser may not look at the girl's nakedness till she is his, and he ought to manage matters through an old woman. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-950" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-951" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lit. wrath; affliction which chokes; in Hindustani it means simply anger. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-951" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-952" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em>, Heaven forbid I be touched by a strange man. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-952" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-953" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Used for fuel and other purposes, such as making "Joss stick." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-953" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-954" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Yaftah' Allah" the offer being insufficient. The rascal is greedy as a Badawi and moreover he is a liar, which the Badawi is not. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-954" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-955" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The third of the four great Moslem schools of Theology, taking its name from the Imam al-Sháfi'í (Mohammed ibn Idris) who died in Egypt A.H. 204, and lies buried near Cairo (Sale's Prel. Disc. sect. viii.). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-955" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-956" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Moslem form of Cabbala, or transcendental philosophy of the Hebrews. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-956" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-957" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Bakh" the word used by the Apostle to Ali his son-in-law. It is the Latin "Euge." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-957" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-958" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Readers, who read for amusement, will do well to "skip" the fadaises of this highly educated young woman. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-958" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-959" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There are three Persian Kings of this name (Artaxerxes) which means "Flour and milk," or "high lion." The text alludes to Ardeshir Babegan, so called because he married the daughter of Babak the shepherd, founder of the Sassanides in A.D. 202. See D'Herbelot, and the Dabistan. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-959" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-960" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alluding to the proverb, "Folk follow their King's faith," "<span xml:lang="la">Cujus regio ejus religio</span>," etc. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-960" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-961" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Second Abbaside, A.H. 136-158 (=754-775). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-961" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-962" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The celebrated companion of Mohammed who succeeded Abu Bakr in the Caliphate (A. H. 13-23=634-644). The Sunnis know him as Al-Adil, the Just; and the Shiahs detest him for his usurpation, his austerity and harshness. It is said that he laughed once, and wept once. The laugh was caused by recollecting how he ate his dough-gods (the idols of the Hanifah tribe) in The Ignorance. The tears were drawn by remembering how he buried alive his baby daughter who, while the grave was being dug, patted away the dust from his hair and beard. Omar was doubtless a great man, but he is one of the most ungenial figures in Moslem history which does not abound in genialities. To me he suggests a Puritan, a Covenanter of the sourest and narrowest type; and I cannot wonder that the Persians abhor him, and abuse him on all occasions. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-962" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-963" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The austere Caliph Omar whose scourge was more feared than the sword was the author of the celebrated saying "Consult them (feminines) and do clear contrary-wise." The dictum is illustrated by a dozen Joe Millers known throughout the East. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-963" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-964" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Our "honour amongst thieves." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-964" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-965" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The sixth successor of Mohammed and founder of the Banu Umayyah or Ommiades, called the "sons of the little mother" from their eponymus (A.H. 41-60=661-680). For his Badawi wife Maysun, and her abuse of her husband, see Pilgrimage iii. 262. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-965" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-966" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Shaykh of the noble tribe, or rather nation, Banu Tamím and a notable of the day, surnamed, no one knows why, "Sire of the Sea." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-966" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-967" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is essential for cleanliness in hot lands: however much the bath may be used, the body-pile and lower hair, if submitted to a microscope, will show more or less sordes adherent. The axilla-hair is plucked because if shaved the growing pile causes itching and the depilatories are held deleterious. At first vellication is painful but the skin becomes used to it. The pecten is shaved either without or after using depilatories, of which more presently. The body-pile is removed by "Takhfíf"; the Libán Shámi (Syrian incense), a fir-gum imported from Scio, is melted and allowed to cool in the form of a pledget. This is passed over the face and all the down adhering to it is pulled up by the roots (Burckhardt No. 420). Not a few Anglo-Indians have adopted these precautions. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-967" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-968" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This Caliph was a tall, fair, handsome man of awe-inspiring aspect. Omar used to look at him and say, "This is the Cæsar of the Arabs," while his wife called him a "fatted ass." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-968" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-969" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The saying is attributed to Abraham when "exercised" by the unkindly temper of Sarah; "woman is made hard and crooked like a rib;" and the modern addition is, "whoso would straighten her, breaketh her." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-969" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-970" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em>, "When ready and in erection." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-970" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-971" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"And do first (before going in to your wives) some act which may be profitable unto your souls"—or, for your soul's good. (Koran, chapt. ii. 223.). Hence Ahnaf makes this prayer. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-971" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-972" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It was popularly said that "Truth-speaking left Omar without a friend." Entitled "The Just" he was murdered by Abu Lúlúah, alias Fírúz, a (Magian?) slave of Al-Maghírah for denying him justice. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-972" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-973" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Governor of Bassorah under the first four Caliphs. See D'Herbelot <em>s. v.</em> "Aschári." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-973" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-974" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ziyad bin Abi Sufyan, illegitimate brother of the Caliph Mu'awiyah afterwards governor of Bassorah, Cufa and Al-Hijaz. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-974" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-975" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The seditions in Kufah were mainly caused by the wilful nepotism of Caliph Othman bin Asákir which at last brought about his death. His main quality seems to have been personal beauty: "never was seen man or woman of fairer face than he and he was the most comely of men:" he was especially famed for beautiful teeth which in old age he bound about with gold wire. He is described as of middling stature, large-limbed, broad shouldered, fleshy of thigh and long in the fore-arm which was hairy. His face inclined to yellow and was pock-marked; his beard was full and his curly hair, which he dyed yellow, fell below his ears. He is called "writer of the Koran" from his edition of the MS., and "Lord of the two Lights" because he married two of the Prophet's daughters, Rukayyah and Umm Kulthum; and, according to the Shi'ahs who call him Othman-i-Lang or "limping Othman," he vilely maltreated them. They justify his death as the act of an Ijmá' al-Muslimin, the general consensus of Moslems which ratifies "Lynch law." Altogether Othman is a mean figure in history. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-975" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-976" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Nár" (fire) is a word to be used delicately from its connection with Gehenna. You say, <em>e.g.</em> "bring me a light, a coal (bassah)" etc.; but if you say "bring me fire!" the enemy will probably remark "He wanteth fire even before his time!" The slang expression would be "bring the sweet:" (Pilgrimage i. 121.) <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-976" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-977" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Omar is described as a man of fair complexion, and very ruddy, but he waxed tawny with age, when he also became bald and grey. He had little hair on the cheeks but a long mustachio with reddish ends. In stature he overtopped the people and was stout as he was tall. A popular saying of Mohammed's is, "All (very) long men are fools save Omar, and all (very) short men are knaves save Ali." The Persians, who abhor Omar, compare every lengthy, ungainly, longsome thing with him; they will say, "This road never ends, like the entrails of Omar." We know little about Ali's appearance except that he was very short and stout, broad and full-bellied with a tawny complexion and exceedingly hairy, his long beard, white as cotton filling all the space between his shoulders. He was a "pocket-Hercules," and incredible tales, like that about the gates of Khaybar, are told of his strength. Lastly, he was the only Caliph who bequeathed anything to literature: his "Cantiloquium" is famous and he has left more than one mystical and prophetic work. See Ockley for his "Sentences" and D'Herbelot <em>s. v.</em> "Ali" and "Gebr." Ali is a noble figure in Moslem history. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-977" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-978" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The emancipation from the consequences of his sins; or it may mean a holy death. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-978" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-979" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Battle fought near Al-Medinah A.D. 625. The word is derived from "Ahad" (one). I have described the site in my Pilgrimage, vol. ii. 227. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-979" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-980" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Haphsa" in older writers; Omar's daughter and one of Mohammed's wives, famous for her connection with the manuscripts of the Koran. From her were (or claimed to be) descended the Hafsites who reigned in Tunis and extended their power far and wide over the Maghrib (Mauritania), till dispossessed by the Turks. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-980" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-981" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> humbly without the usual strut or swim: it corresponds with the biblical walking or going softly (1 Kings xxi. 27; Isaiah xxxviii. 15, etc.). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-981" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-982" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A theologian of the seventh and eighth centuries. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-982" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-983" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> to prepare himself by good works, especially alms-giving, for the next world. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-983" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-984" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A theologian of the eighth century. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-984" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-985" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Abd al-Aziz was eighth Ommiade (regn. A.H. 99=717) and the fifth of the orthodox, famed for a piety little known to his house. His most celebrated saying was, "Be constant in meditation on death: if thou be in straitened case 'twill enlarge it, and if in affluence 'twill straiten it upon thee." He died, poisoned, it is said, in A.H. 101. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-985" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-986" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Abu Bakr originally called Abd al-Ka'ahah (slave of the Ka'abah) took the name of Abdullah and was surnamed Abu Bakr (father of the virgin) when Mohammed, who before had married only widows, took to wife his daughter, the famous or infamous Ayishah. "Bikr" is the usual form, but "Bakr," primarily meaning a young camel, is metaphorically applied to human youth (Lane's Lex. <em>s. v.</em>). The first Caliph was a cloth-merchant, like many of the Meccan chiefs. He is described as very fair with bulging brow, deep-set eyes and thin-cheeked, of slender build and lean-loined, stooping and with the backs of his hands fleshless. He used tinctures of Henna and Katam for his beard. The Persians who hate him, call him "Pir-i-Kaftár," the old she-hyæna, and believe that he wanders about the deserts of Arabia in perpetual rut which the males must satisfy. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-986" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-987" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The second, fifth, sixth and seventh Ommiades. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-987" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-988" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The mother of Omar bin Abd al-Aziz was a granddaughter of Omar bin Al-Khattab. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-988" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-989" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brother of this Omar's successor, Yezid II. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-989" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-990" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>So the Turkish proverb "The fish begins to stink at the head." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-990" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-991" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Calling to the slaves. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-991" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-992" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>When the "Day of Arafat" (9th of Zú'l-Hijjah) falls upon a Friday. For this Hajj al-Akbar see my Pilgrimage iii. 226. It is often confounded by writers (even by the learned M. Caussin de Perceval) with the common Pilgrimage as opposed to the Umrah, or "Lesser Pilgrimage" (ibid. iii. 342, etc.). The latter means etymologically cohabiting with a woman in her father's house as opposed to 'Ars or leading her to the husband's home: it is applied to visiting Meccah and going through all the pilgrim-rites but not at the Pilgrimage-season. Hence its title "Hajj al-Asghar" the "Lesser Hajj." But "Umrah" is also applied to a certain ceremony between the hills Safá (a large hard rock) and Marwah (stone full of flints), which accompanies the Hajj and which I have described (ibid. iii. 344). At Meccah I also heard of two places called Al-Umrah, the Greater in the Wady Fátimah and the Lesser half way nearer the city (ibid. iii. 344). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-992" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-993" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A fair specimen of the unworthy egoism which all religious systems virtually inculcate. Here a pious father leaves his children miserable to save his own dirty soul. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-993" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-994" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Chief of the Banú Tamím, one of noblest of tribes derived from Tamím, the uncle of Kuraysh (Koreish); hence the poets sang:—</p>
					<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">There cannot be a son nobler than Kuraysh,</div>
								<div class="line">Nor an uncle nobler than Tamím.</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>The high-minded Tamím is contrasted with the mean-spirited Kays, who also gave rise to a tribe; and hence the saying concerning one absolutely inconsistent, "Art thou now Tamím and then Kays?" <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-994" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-995" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Surnamed Al-Sakafí, Governor of Al-Yaman and Irak. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-995" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-996" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tenth Ommiade (regn. A.H. 105-125=724-743). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-996" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-997" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Or "clothe thee in worn-out clothes" <em>i.e.</em> "Become a Fakir" or religious mendicant. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-997" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-998" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This gratuitous incest in ignorance injures the tale and is as repugnant to Moslem as to Christian taste. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-998" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-999" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The child is named either on the day of its birth or on that day week. The father whispers it in the right ear, often adding the Azán or prayer-call, and repeating in the left ear the "Ikámah" or Friday sentence. There are many rules for choosing names according to the week-day, the ascendant planet, the "Sortes Coranicæ," etc. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-999" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1000" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Amongst Moslems as amongst Christians there are seven deadly sins: idolatry, murder, falsely charging modest women with unchastity, robbing orphans, usury, desertion in Holy War and disobedience to parents. The difference between the two creeds is noteworthy. And the sage knows only three, intemperance, ignorance and egoism. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1000" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1000" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Meaning, "It was decreed by Destiny; so it came to pass," appropriate if not neat. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1000" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1001" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The short, stout, dark, long-haired and two bunched camel from "Bukhtar" (Bactria), the "Eastern" (Bakhtar) region on the Amu or Jayhún (Oxus) River; afterwards called Khorasan. The two-humped camel is never seen in Arabia except with northern caravans, and to speak of it would be a sore test of Badawi credulity. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1001" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1002" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Kaylúlah" is the "forty-winks" about noon: it is a Sunnat or Practice of the Prophet who said, "Make the mid-day siesta, for verily at this hour the devils sleep not." "Aylúlah" is slumbering after morning prayers (our "beauty-sleep"), causing heaviness and idleness: "Ghaylúlah" is dozing about 9 a.m. engendering poverty and wretchedness: "Kaylúlah" (with the guttural Kaf) is sleeping before evening prayers and "Faylúlah" is slumbering after sunset—both held to be highly detrimental. (Pilgrimage ii. 49.) <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1002" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1003" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Biblical "Hamath" (Hightown) too well known to require description. It is still famous for the water-wheels mentioned by al-Hariri (assembly of the Banu Harám). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1003" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1004" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>When they say, The leven flashes bright on the hills of Al-Yaman, the allusion is to the south quarter, where summer-lightning is seen. Al-Yaman (always with the article) means, I have said, the right-hand region to one facing the rising sun and Al-Sham (Syria) the left-hand region. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1004" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1005" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Again "he" for "she," in delicacy and jealousy of making public the beauty or conditions of the "veiled sex." Even public singers would hesitate to use a feminine pronoun. As will be seen, however, the rule is not invariably kept and hardly ever in Badawi poetry. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1005" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1006" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The normal pun on "Nuzhat al-Zaman"=Delight of the Age or Time. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1006" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1007" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The reader will find in my Pilgrimage (i. 305) a sketch of the Takht-rawan or travelling-litter, in which pilgrimesses are wont to sleep. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1007" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1008" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In poetry it holds the place of our Zephyr; and the "Bád-i-Sabá"=Breeze o' the morn, is much addressed by Persian poets. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1008" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1009" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here appears the nervous, excitable, hysterical Arab temperament which is almost phrensied by the neighbourhood of a home from which he had run away. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1009" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1010" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Zau al-Makan and Nuzhat al-Zaman. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1010" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1011" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The idea is essentially Eastern, "A lion at home and a lamb abroad" is the popular saying. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1011" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1012" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Hubb al-Watan" (=love of birthplace, patriotism) of which the Tradition says "Min al-Imán" (=is part of man's religion). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1012" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1013" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He is supposed to speak <em>en prince</em>; and he yields to a prayer when he spurns a command. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1013" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1014" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In such caravans each party must keep its own place under pain of getting into trouble with the watchmen and guards. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1014" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1015" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mr. Payne (ii. 109) borrows this and the next quotation from the Bul. Edit. i. 386. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1015" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1016" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the expiation of inconsiderate oaths see Koran (chapt. v.) I cannot but think that Al-Islam treats perjury too lightly: all we can say is that it improves upon Hinduism, which practically seems to leave the punishment to the gods. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1016" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1017" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Kausar," as has been said, represents the classical nectar, the Amrita of the Hindus. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1017" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1018" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From Bul. Edit. i. 186. The couplet in the Mac. Edit. i. 457 is very wildly applied. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1018" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1019" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The "insula" of Sancho Panza. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1019" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1020" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This should have assured him that he stood in no danger. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1020" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1021" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here ends the wearisome tale of the brother and sister and the romance of chivalry begins once more with the usual Arab digressions. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1021" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1022" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I have derived this word from the Persian "rang"=colour, hue, kind. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1022" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1023" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Otherwise all would be superseded, like U. S. officials under a new President. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1023" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1024" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Nímshah" from the Pers. Nímchah, a "half-sword," a long dagger worn in the belt. Richardson derives it from Namsh, being freckled (damasked). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1024" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1025" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Indian term for a tent large enough to cover a troop of cavalry. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1025" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1026" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Marhúm" a formula before noticed. It is borrowed from the Jewish, "of blessed memory" (after the name of the honoured dead, Prov. x. 17.); with the addition of "upon whom be peace," as opposed to the imprecation, "May the name of the wicked rot!" <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1026" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1027" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The speeches of the five damsels should be read only by students. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1027" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1028" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> Those who look for "another and a better." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1028" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1029" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The title of Caliph Abu Bakr because he bore truthful witness to the Apostle's mission or, others say, he confirmed the "Mi'ráj" or nocturnal journey to Heaven. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1029" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1030" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>All this is Koranic (chapt. ii., etc.) <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1030" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1031" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This may have applied more than once to "hanging judges" in the Far West. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1031" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1032" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A traditionist and jurisconsult of Al-Medinah in the seventh and eighth centuries. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1032" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1033" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Alexander of the Koran and Eastern legends not to be confounded with the Alexander of Macedon. He will be noticed in a future Night. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1033" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1034" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Æsop, according to the Arabs: of him or rather of the two Lukmans, more presently. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1034" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1035" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Koran ii. 185. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1035" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1036" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mohammed. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1036" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1037" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>One of the Asháb or Companions of Mohammed. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1037" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1038" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A noted traditionist at Cufa in the seventh century. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1038" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1039" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Koran, chapt. lxxiv. 1 (and verse 8 follows). The Archangel Gabriel is supposed to address Mohammed and not a few divines believe this Surah (chapter) to have been first revealed. Mr. Rodwell makes it No. ii. following the Fatrah or silent interval which succeeded No. xcvi. "Clots of Blood." See his 2nd Edit. p. 3 for further details. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1039" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1040" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> dangerous to soul-health. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1040" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1041" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the Mac. Edit. "Abd" for "Sa'id." The latter was a black and a native of Cufa during the first century (A.H.) and is still famous as a traditionist. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1041" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1042" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Shirk," giving a partner to Allah, attending chiefly to Christians and idolaters; and in a minor degree to Jews and Guebres. We usually English it by "polytheism," which is clumsy and conveys a wrong idea. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1042" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1043" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Grandson of the Caliph Ali. He is one of the Imams (High-priests) of the Shi'ah school. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1043" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1044" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An eminent traditionist of the eighth century (A.D.) <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1044" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1045" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The prayers of the Fast-month and Pilgrimage-month are often said in especial places outside the towns and cities; these are the Indian Id(Eed-)gáh. They have a screen of wall about a hundred yards long with a central prayer-niche and the normal three steps for the preacher; and each extremity is garnished with an imitation minaret. They are also called Namáz-gah and one is sketched by Herklots (Plate iii. fig. 2). The object of the trips thither in Zu'l-Ka'adah and Zú'l-Hijjah is to remind Moslems of the "Ta'aríf," or going forth from Meccah to Mount Arafat. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1045" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1046" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Al-Háfi," which in Egyptian means sore-footed as well. He was an ascetic of the eighth and ninth centuries (A.D.). He relates a tradition of the famous soldier-saint Khálid bin Walíd who lies buried like the poet Ka'ab al-Ahbár near Hums (Emessa) once the Bœotia, Phrygia, Abdera, Suabia of Syria now Halbun (pronounced Halbáun) near Damascus. I cannot explain how this Kuraysh noble (a glorious figure in Moslem history) is claimed by the Afghans as one of their countrymen and made to speak Pukhtu or Pushtu, their rough old dialect of Persian. The curious reader will consult my Pilgrimage iii. 322 for the dialogue between Mohammed and Khalid. Again there is general belief in Arabia that the English sent a mission to the Prophet, praying that Khalid might be despatched to proselytise them: unfortunately Mohammed was dead and the "Ingriz" ratted. It is popularly held that no armed man can approach Khalid's grave; but I suppose my revolver did not count. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1046" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1047" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>When he must again wash before continuing prayer. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1047" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1048" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bin Adham; another noted ascetic of the eighth century. Those curious about these unimportant names will consult the great Biographical Dictionary of Ibn Khallikan, translated by Baron MacGuckin de Slane (1842-45). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1048" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1049" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thus making Bishr the "Imám" (antistes) lit. one who stands in front. In Koran xvii. 74 it means "leader": in ii. 118 Allah makes Abraham an "Imam to mankind." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1049" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1050" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A favourite sentiment in the East: we find it at the very beginning of Sa'di's Gulistan: better a weal-bringing lie than a harm-dealing truth. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1050" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1051" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A penny, one sixth of the drachma. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1051" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1052" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Founder of the Hanbali, fourth (in date) of the four orthodox Moslem schools. The Caliph al-Mu'atasim bi'llah, son of Harun al-Rashid, who believed the Koran to have been created and not a Logos (whatever that may be), co-eternal with Allah, scourged this Imam severely for "differing in opinion" (A.H. 220=833). In fact few of the notable reverends of that day escaped without a caress of the scourge or the sword. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1052" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1053" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A learned man of the eighth century at Bassorah (A.D.). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1053" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1054" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A traditionist of Khorasan in the ninth century (A.D.). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1054" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1055" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Azal," opp. to "Abad," eternity without end, infinity. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1055" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1056" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Koran lxvi. 6. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1056" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1057" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A traditionist of Al-Medinah, eighth century (A.D.). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1057" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1058" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Músá": the Egyptian word was "Mesu," the "child" or the "boy" (brought up in the palace?), and the Hebrews made it "Mosheh" or "one drawn out of the water;" "Mu" in Egypt being water, the Arab "Ma"; whence probably the moderns have derived the dim. "Moyeh;" vulg. Egyptian for water. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1058" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1059" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Koran, chapt. xxviii.: Shu'ayb is our Jethro: Koran, chapt. vii. and xi. Mr Rodwell suggests (p. 101) that the name has been altered from Hobab (Numb. x 29). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1059" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1060" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Taub" (Saub), the long shirt popularly written in English Tobe and pronounced so by Egyptians. It is worn by both sexes (Lane, M. E. chapt. i. "Tob") in Egypt, and extends into the heart of Moslem Africa: I can compare it with nothing but a long nightgown dyed a dirty yellow by safflower and about as picturesque as a carter's smock-frock. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1060" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1061" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There is nothing of this in the Koran; and it is a most unhappy addition, as Moses utterly and pretentiously ignored a "next world." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1061" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1062" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Koran xxviii. 22-27. Mohammed evidently confounded the contract between Laban and Jacob (Gen. xxix. 15-39). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1062" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1063" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>So says Al Hariri (Ass. of Sasan), "The neighbour before the house and the traveller before the journey." In certain cities the neighbourhood is the real detective police, noting every action and abating scandals (such as orgies, etc.) with a strong hand and with the full consent of public opinion and of the authorities. This loving the neighbour shows evident signs of being borrowed from Christianity. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1063" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1064" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Al-Asamm, a theologian of Balkh, ninth century (A.D.). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1064" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1065" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The founder of the Senior School, for which see Sale Prel. Disc. sect. viii. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1065" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1066" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thus serving the Lord by sinning against his own body. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1066" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1067" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An Egyptian doctor of the law (ninth century). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1067" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1068" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Koran lxxvii. 35, 36. This is one of the earliest and most poetical chapters of the book. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1068" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1069" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Abu Hanifah was scourged for refusing to take office and was put to death in prison, it is said by poison (A.H. 150=A.D. 767), for a judicial sentence authorising rebellion against the second Abbaside, Al-Mansúr, surnamed Abu'l-Dawánik (Father of Pence) for his exceeding avarice. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1069" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1070" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Lá rayba fí-hi" says the Koran (ii. 1) of itself; and the saying is popularly applied to all things of the Faith. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1070" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1071" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Rijál al-Ghayb," somewhat like the "Himalayan Brothers" of modern superstition. See Herklots (Qanoon-e-Islam) for a long and careful description of these "Mardán-i-Ghayb" (Pers.), a "class of people mounted on clouds," invisible, but moving in a circular orbit round the world; and suggesting the Hindu "Lokapálas." They should not be in front of the traveller nor on his right, but either behind or on his left hand. Hence tables, memorial couplets and hemistichs are required to ascertain the station, without which precaution journeys are apt to end badly. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1071" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1072" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A sweetmeat before noticed. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1072" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1073" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Door-hinges in the east are two projections for the top and bottom of the leaf playing in hollows of the lintel and threshold. It appears to be the primitive form, for we find it in the very heart of Africa. In the basaltic cities of the Hauran, where the doors are of thick stone, they move easily on these pins. I found them also in the official (not the temple) City of Palmyra, but all broken. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1073" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1074" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The effect of the poison and of the incantation which accompanied it. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1074" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1075" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>King Omar who had raped her. My sympathies are all with the old woman who rightly punished the royal lecher. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1075" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1076" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Zunnár," the Gr. <span xml:lang="el">ζώνη</span>. Christians and Jews were compelled by the fanatical sumptuary laws of the Caliph Al-Mutawakkil (A.D. 856) to wear a broad leather belt in public; hence it became a badge of the Faith. Probably it was confounded with the "Janeo" (Brahmanical thread) and the Parsi sacred girdle called Kashti. (Dabistan i, 297, etc.). Both Mandeville and La Brocquière speak of "Christians of the Girdle, because they are all girt above;" intending Jacobites or Nestorians. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1076" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1077" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Siláh-dár" (Arab. and Pers.)=a military officer of high rank; literally an "armour-bearer," chosen for valour and trustworthiness. So Jonathan had a "young man" (brave) who bare his armour (1 Sam. xiv. 1, 6 and 7); and Goliath had a man that bare the shield before him (ibid. xvii. 7, 41). Men will not readily forget the name of Sulayman Agha, called the Silahdar, in Egypt (Lane M. E. chapt. iv.). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1077" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1078" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It will be told afterwards. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1078" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1079" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The elder brother thus showed himself a vassal and proved himself a good Moslem by not having recourse to civil war. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1079" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1080" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Ghazwah," the corrupt Gallicism, now Europeanised=raid, foray. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1080" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1081" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Turk in modern parlance means a Turkoman, a nomade: the settled people call themselves Osmanli or Othmanli. Turkoman=Turk-like. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1081" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1082" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Nimsá;" southern Germans, Austrians; from the Slav. "Nemica" (any Germans), literally meaning "The dumb" (nemac), because they cannot speak Slav. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1082" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1083" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Dubárá" from the Slav. "Dubrovnik," from "Dub" (an oak) and "Dubrava" (an oak forest). Ragusa, once a rival of Venice, gave rise to the word "Argosy." D'Herbelot calls it "Dobravenedik" or "Good Venice," the Turkish name, because it paid tribute when Venice would not (?). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1083" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1084" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Jawarnah," or, "Júrnah" evidently Zara, a place of many names, Jadera (Hirtius de Bell. Alex. cap. 13), Jadra, Zadra (whence the modern term), Diadora, Diadosca and Jadrossa. This important Liburnian city sent forth many cruisers in crusading days; hence the Arabs came to know its name. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1084" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1085" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Banu 'l-Asfar;" which may mean "Pale faces," in the sense of "yaller girls" (New Orleans) and that intended by North American Indians, or, possibly, the peoples with yellow (or rather tow-coloured) hair we now call Russians. The races of Hindostan term the English not "white men," but "red men;" and the reason will at once be seen by comparing a Britisher with a high-caste Nágar Brahman whose face is of parchment-colour as if he had drunk <em>exsangue cuminum</em>. The Yellow-faces of the text correspond with the Sansk. "Svetadvipa"—Whiteman's Land. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1085" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1086" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Al-Musakhkham." No Moslem believes that Isa was crucified and a favourite fancy is that Judas, changed to the likeness of Jesus, thus paid for his treason. (Evangel. Barnabæ). Hence the resurrection is called not "Kiyámah" but "Kumámah"=rubbish. This heresy about the Cross they share with the Docetes, "certain beasts in the shape of men" (says Ignatius), who held that a phantom was crucified. So far the Moslems are logical, for "Isa," being angelically, miraculously and immaculately conceived, could not die; but they contradict themselves when they hold a vacant place near Mohammed's tomb for the body of Isa after his second coming as a forerunner to Mohammed and Doomday (Pilgrimage ii. 89). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1086" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1087" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A Diviner, a priest, esp. Jewish, and not belonging to the tribe of Levi. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1087" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1088" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Again the coarsest word "Khara." The allusion is to the vulgar saying, "Thou eatest skite!" (<em>i.e.</em> thou talkest nonsense). Decent English writers modify this to, "Thou eatest dirt:" and Lord Beaconsfield made it ridiculous by turning it into "eating <em>sand</em>." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1088" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1089" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These silly scandals, which cause us only to smile, excite Easterns to fury. I have seen a Moslem wild with rage on hearing a Christian parody the opening words of the Koran, "Bismillahi 'l-Rahmáni 'l-Rahím, Mismish wa Kamar al-din," roughly translated, "In the name of Allah, the Compassionating, the Compassionate! Apricots and marmalade." The idea of the Holy Merde might have been suggested by the Hindus: see Mandeville, of the archiprotopapaton (prelate) carrying ox-dung and urine to the King, who therewith anoints his brow and breast, &amp;c. And, incredible to relate, this is still practised after a fashion by the Parsis, one of the most progressive and the sharpest witted of Asiatic races. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1089" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1090" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Meaning that he had marked his brow with a cross (of ashes?) as certain do on Ash-Wednesday. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1090" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1091" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Syria, the "left-hand land" as has before been explained. The popular saying about its people is "Shámi shúmi!"—the Syrian is small potatoes (to render the sense Americanicè). Nor did Syrus, the slave in Roman days, bear the best of names. In Al-Hijaz the Syrian is addressed "Abú Shám" (Father of Syria) and insulted as "Abuser of the Salt" a (traitor). Yet many sayings of Mohammed are recorded in honour of Syria, and he sometimes used Syriac words. Such were "Bakh, bakh" (=euge, before noticed), and "Kakh," a congener of the Latin Cacus and Caca which our day has docked to "cack." (Pilgrimage iii. 115). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1091" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1092" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Koran xiv. 34. "They (Unbelievers) shall be thrown therein (<em>i.e.</em>, the House of Perdition=Hell); and an unhappy dwelling shall it be." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1092" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1093" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The leg-cut is a prime favourite with the Eastern Sworder, and a heavy two-handed blade easily severs a horse's leg. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1093" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1094" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mohammed repeatedly declared (Koran lxi.) that the Christians had falsified the passage ("I go to my Father and the Paraclete shall come," John xvi. 7) promising the advent of the Comforter, <span xml:lang="el">παράκλητος</span>, (ibid. xiv. 20; xv. 26) by substituting the latter word for <span xml:lang="el">περικλυτός</span> glorious, renowned, <em>i.e.</em>, Ahmed or Mohammed=the praised one. This may have been found in the Arabic translation of the Gospels made by Warakah, cousin to Mohammed's first wife; and hence in Koran lxi. we find Jesus prophesying of an Apostle "whose name shall be Ahmad." The word has consequently been inserted into the Arabic Gospel of Saint Barnabas (Dabistan iii. 67). Moslems accept the Pentateuch, the Psalter and the Gospel; but assert (Koran, <em>passim</em>) that all extant copies have been Hopelessly corrupted, and they are right. Moses, to whom the Pentateuch is attributed, notices his own death and burial—"the mair the miracle," said the old Scotch lady. The "Psalms of David" range over a period of some five hundred years, and there are three Isaiahs who pass with the vulgar for one. The many apocryphal Gospels, all of which have been held genuine and canonical at different times and in different places, prove that the four, which are still in use, were retained because they lack the manifest absurdities of their discarded rivals. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1094" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1095" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Labbayka;" the Pilgrimage-cry (Night xxii.) which in Arabic is,</p>
					<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">Labbayk' Allahumma, Labbayk'!</div>
								<div class="line">Lá Sharíka laka, Labbayk'!</div>
								<div class="line">Inna 'l-hamda w'al ni'amata laka wa'l mulk!</div>
								<div class="line">Labbayk' Allahumma, Labbayk'!</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Some add "Here am I, and I honour Thee, the son of Thy two slaves; beneficence and good are all between Thy hands." With the "Talbiyah" the pilgrim should bless the Prophet, pray Allah to grant Heaven and exclaim, "By Thy mercy spare us from the pains of Hell-fire!" (Pilgrimage iii. 232.) Labbayka occurs in the verses attributed to Caliph Ali; so labba=he faced and yalubbu=it faces (as one house faces another); lastly, he professed submission to Allah; in which sense, together with the verbal noun "Talbiyah," it is used by Al-Hariri (Pref. and Ass. of Su'adah). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1095" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1096" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. Kissís (plur. Kusús) from <span xml:lang="el">Ἐκκλησιαστὴς</span>. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1096" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1097" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Koran ii. The "red cow" is evidently the "red heifer" of Barnabas, chapt. vii. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1097" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1098" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Al-Jásalík"=<span xml:lang="el">Καθολικὸς</span>. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1098" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1099" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is from the first "Gospel of Infancy," wherein Jesus said to his mother, "Verily I am Jesus, the Son of God, the Word which thou hast brought forth, as the Angel Gabriel did declare unto thee; and my Father hath sent me to save the world" (chapt. i. 2). The passage is virtually quoted in the Koran (chapt. iii. 141), of course omitting "the Son of God." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1099" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1100" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mohammed allowed his locks to grow down to his ear-lobes but never lower. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1100" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1101" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Lisám" I have explained as a covering for the lower face, made by drawing over it the corner of the head-kerchief (Pilgrimage i. 346). The Lisám of the African Tawárik hoods the eyes so that a man must turn up his face to see, and swathes all the lower half, leaving only the nose exposed. And this is worn by many men by night as well as by day, doubtless to avoid the evil eye. The native Sultans of Darfur, like those of Bornu and others further west, used white muslin as a face-wrap: hence, too, the ceremonies when spitting, etc., etc. The Kúfiyah or head-kerchief of the Arabs soon reached Europe and became in Low Latin Cuphia; in Spanish Escofia; in Ital. Cuffia or Scuffia; in French Escoffion, Scofion (Reine Marguerite) Coëffe (<span xml:lang="fr">une pellicule, marque de bonheur</span>), Coiffe and Coife, &amp;c.; the Scotch Curch or Coif, opposed to the maiden snood; and, lastly our Sergeant-at-Law's Coif. Littré, the Learned, who in erudition was <i><span xml:lang="fr">né coiffé</span></i>, has missed this obvious derivation. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1101" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Cutting," throughout the book, alludes to the scymitar with which Arabs never give point; and "thrusting" to the footman's spear and the horseman's lance. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1102" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1103" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A popular phrase, I repeat, for extreme terror and consternation. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1103" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1104" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The name usually applies to a well-known district and city of Al-Yaman, where "Koss the eloquent" was bishop in Mohammed's day: the Negiran of D'Herbelot. Here, however, it is the Syrian Najrán (Nejrân of Missionary Porter's miserable Handbook); now a wretched village near the volcanic Lajjá, about one hundred and twenty miles direct south of Damascus and held by Druzes and Christians. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1104" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1105" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Kantár (quintal) of 100 ratls (lbs.)=98-99 lbs. avoir. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1105" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1106" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Juráb" (bag) mi'adat-ih (of his belly), the "curdling of the testicles" in fear is often mentioned. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1106" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1107" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Clearly alluding to the magic so deeply studied by mediæval Jews. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1107" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1108" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Sahákah," lit. rubbing. The Moslem Harem is a great school for this "Lesbian (which I would call Atossan) love"; but the motive of the practice lies deeper. As amongst men the mixture of the feminine with the masculine temperament leads to sodomy, so the reverse makes women prefer their own sex. These tribades are mostly known by peculiarities of form and features, hairy cheeks and upper lips, gruff voices, hircine odour and the large projecting clitoris with erectile powers known to the Arabs as "bazar" (<span xml:lang="ar">بظر</span>), hence Tabzír=circumcision or amputation of such clitoris. Burckhardt (Prov. 436) translates "Bazarah" by slut or wench. He adds "it originally signifies the labia which the Cairenes also entitle Zambúr and which are cut off in girlhood." See also Lane, Lex. s. v.; Tabzír. Both writers confuse excision of the nymphæ with circumcision of the clitoris (Zambúr). Al-Siyúti (Kitab al-Izá' fi'Ilm al-Nikah) has a very interesting chapter on Sapphic venery, which is well known to Europe as proved by such works as "Gamiani," and "<span xml:lang="fr">Anandria ou Confessions de Mademoiselle Sappho, avec la Clef</span>," Lesbos, 1778. Onanism is fatally prevalent: in many Harems and girls' schools tallow-candles and similar succedania are vainly forbidden and bananas when detected are cut into four so as to be useless; of late years, however, China has sent some marvellous artificial phalli of stuffed bladder, horn and even caoutchouc, the latter material of course borrowed from Europe. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1108" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1109" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is considered a powerful aphrodisiac in the East. Hence male devotees are advised to avoid the "two reds," <em>i.e.</em> meat and wine; while the "two reds," which corrupt women, are gold and saffron, that is perfumery. Hence also the saying of Mohammed:—"Perfumes for men should have scent and not colour; for women should have colour and not scent." (Mishkát al-Masábíh ii. 361.) <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1109" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1110" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These are the "Hibás" or thin cords of wool which the Badawi binds round his legs, I believe to keep off cramp. (Pilgrimage iii. 78). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1110" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1111" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Crying out "La iláha illa 'llah." (There is no god but <em>the</em> God.); technically called "Tahlíl." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1111" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1112" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> Men, angels and devils, the "Triloka" (triple people) of the Hindus. Alamín (plur.), never Alamayn (dual), is the Triregno denoted by the papal Tiara, the three Christian kingdoms being Heaven, Hell and Purgatory. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1112" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1113" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Matrahinna or Mit-Rahinah is a well-known village near Memphis; the name being derived from the old Egyptian Minat-ro-hinnu, the port at the mouth of the canal. Let me remark that two of these three words, "Minat" and "Ru," are still common in "Aryan" Persian. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1113" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1114" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kirámat, a sign, a prodigy, opposed to Mu'ujizah, a miracle wrought by a prophet. The Súfis explain this thaumaturgy by Allah changing something of Nature's ordinary course in favour of an especial worshipper; and, after a fashion, this is Catholic doctrine (See Dabistan, iii. 173). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1114" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1115" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Koran, x. 25, "until the earth receive its vesture and be adorned with various plants." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1115" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1116" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> the young hair sprouting on the boy's cheek. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1116" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1117" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A fighter for the faith and now a title which follows the name, <em>e.g.</em> Osmán Páshá Gházi, whom the English press dubbed "Gházi Osmán." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1117" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1118" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>That is the King of Constantinople. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1118" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1119" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cassia fistularis, a kind of carob: "Shambar" is the Arab. form of the Persian "Chambar." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1119" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1120" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Koran, ii. 149. Hence the vulgar idea that Martyrs are still alive in the flesh. See my Pilgrimage (ii. 110 and elsewhere) for the romantic and picturesque consequences of that belief. The Commentators (Jalál al-Dín, etc.) play tricks with the Koranic words, "they (martyrs) are not dead but living" (iii. 179) by placing the happy souls in the crops of green birds which eat of the fruits and drink of the waters of Paradise; whereas the reprobates and the (very) wicked are deposited in black birds which drain the sanies and the boiling waters of Hell. Amongst the Greeks a body remaining entire long after death suggests Anathema Maranatha: it is the contrary with Catholic Christians (Boccaccio iv. 5, of the Pot of Basil). Concerning this creed see Maundrell, Letter of 1698. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1120" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1121" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tor is "Mount Sinai" in the Koran (xcv. I). I have only to repeat my opinion concerning the present site so called: "It is evident that Jebel Serbal dates only from the early days of Coptic Christianity; that Jebel Musa, its Greek rival, rose after the visions of Helena in the fourth century; whilst the building of the Convent by Justinian belongs to A.D. 527. Ras Safsáfah, its rival to the north, is an affair of yesterday, and may be called the invention of Robinson; and Jebel Katerina, to the South is the property of Rüppell" (Midian Revisited i., 237.). I would therefore call the "Sinaitic" Peninsula, Peninsula of Paran in old days and Peninsula of Tor (from its chief port) in our time. It is still my conviction that the true Mount Sinai will be found in Jabal Aráif, or some such unimportant height to the north of the modern Hajj-road from Suez to Akabah. Even about the name (which the Koran writes "Sainá" and "Sínín") there is a dispute: It is usually derived from the root "Sanah"=sentis, a bush; but this is not satisfactory. Our eminent Assyriologist, Professor Sayce, would connect it with "Sin," the Assyrian Moon-god, as Mount Nebo with the Sun-god and he expects to find there the ruins of a Lunar temple as a Solar fane stands on Ba'al Zapuna (Baal Zephon) or the classical Mount Casius. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1121" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1122" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alluding to the miracle of Aaron's rod (the gift of Jethro) as related in the Koran (chapts. vii. I., xx., etc.), where the Egyptian sorcerers threw down thick ropes which by their magic twisted and coiled like serpents. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1122" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1123" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Ayát" lit. "signs," here "miracles of the truth," l.c. Koranic versets as opposed to chapters. The ranks of the enemy represent the latter, sword-cuts the former—a very persuasive mode of preaching. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1123" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1124" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lane (M. E. chapt. iii.) shows by a sketch the position of the worshipper during this "Salám" which is addressed, some say, to the guardian angels, others suppose to all brother-believers and angels. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1124" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1125" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em>, where the Syrians found him. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1125" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1126" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em>, Dedianus Arabised; a name knightly and plebeian. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1126" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1127" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In such tales the Wazir is usually the sharp-witted man, contrasting with the "dummy," his master. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1127" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1128" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Carrier-pigeons were extensively used at this time. The Caliph Al-Násir li-Díni 'llah (regn. A. H. 575=1180) was, according to Ibn Khaldún, very fond of them. The moderns of Damascus still affect them. My successor, Mr. Consul Kirby Green, wrote an excellent report on pigeon-fancying at Damascus. The so-called Maundeville or Mandeville in A.D. 1322 speaks of carrier-pigeons in Syria as a well-known mode of intercourse between lord and lord. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1128" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1129" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mohammed who declared "There is no monkery in Al-Islam," and who virtually abolished the priest, had an especial aversion to the shaveling (Ruhbán). But the "<span xml:lang="la">Gens æterna in quâ nemo nascitur</span>" (Pliny v. 17) managed to appear even in Al-Islam, as Fakirs, Dervishes, Súfis, etc. Of this more hereafter. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1129" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1130" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> her holiness would act like a fascinating talisman. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1130" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1131" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The "smoking out" practice is common amongst the Arabs: hence Marshal Pelissier's so-called "barbarity." The Public is apt to forget that on a campaign the general's first duty is to save his own men by any practice which the laws of fair warfare do not absolutely forbid. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1131" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1132" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em>, Mohammed, who promised Heaven and threatened Hell. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1132" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1133" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Ahr" or "ihr," fornication or adultery, <em>i.e.</em>, irreligion, infidelity as amongst the Hebrews. (Isaiah xxiii. 17). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1133" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1134" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A sign of defeat. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1134" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1135" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In English "last night": I have already noted that the Moslem day, like the Jewish and the Scandinavian, begins at sundown; and "layl," a night, is often used to denote the twenty-four hours between sunset and sunset, whilst "yaum," a day, would by us be translated in many cases "battle-day." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1135" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1136" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Iterum the "Himalayan Brothers." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1136" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1137" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Again, Mohammed who promised Good to the Good, and <em>vice versâ</em>. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1137" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1138" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>They are sad doggrel like most of the <i><span xml:lang="fr">pièces d'occasion</span></i> inserted in The Nights. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1138" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1139" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Here "Kahwah" (coffee) is used in its original sense of strong old wine. The derivation is "Akhá"=fastidire fecit, causing disinclination for food, the Matambre (kill-hunger) of the Iberians. In old days the scrupulous called coffee "Kihwah" in order to distinguish it from "Kahwah," wine. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1139" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1140" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> Mohammed, a common title. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1140" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1141" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>That is, fatal to the scoffer and the impious. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1141" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1142" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Equivalent to our "The Devil was sick," etc. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1142" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1143" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> to the enemy: the North American Indians (so called) use similar forms of "inverted speech"; and the Australian aborigines are in no way behind them. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1143" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1144" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Vol. i., p. 154 (Night xvi.). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1144" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1145" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Sauf," a particle denoting a near future whereas "Sa-" points to one which may be very remote. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1145" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1146" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From the root "Shauh"=having a fascinating eye, terrifying. The Irish call the fascinater "eybitter" and the victim (who is also rhymed to death) "eybitten." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1146" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1147" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em>, not like the noble-born, strong in enduring the stress of fight. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1147" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1148" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em>, of Abraham. For the Well Zemzem and the Place of Abraham, see my Pilgrimage (iii. 171-175, etc.), where I described the water as of salt-bitter taste, like that of Epsom (iii. 203). Sir William Muir (in his excellent life of Mahomet, I. cclviii.) remarks that "the flavour of stale water bottled up for months would not be a criterion of the same water freshly drawn;" but soldered tins-full of water drawn a fortnight before are to be had in Calcutta and elsewhere after Pilgrimage time; and analysis would at once detect the salt. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1148" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1149" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Racing was and is a favourite pastime with those hippomanists, the Arabs; but it contrasts strongly with our civilised form being a trial of endurance rather than of speed. The Prophet is said to have limited betting in these words, "There shall be no wagering save on the Khuff (camel's foot), the Hafir (hoof of horse, ass, etc.) or the Nasal (arrow-pile or lance head)." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1149" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1150" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the Mac. Edit. "Arman"=Armenia, which has before occurred. The author or scribe here understands by "Cæsarea" not the old Turris Stratonis, Herod's city called after Augustus, but Cæsareia the capital of Cappadocia (Pliny, vi. 3), the royal residence before called Mazaca (Strabo). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1150" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1151" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An idiom meaning "a very fool." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1151" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1152" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> Kána (was) má (that which) was (kána). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1152" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1153" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A son being "the lamp of a dark house." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1153" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1154" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>When the Israelites refused to receive the Law (the souls of all the Prophets even those unborn being present at the Covenant), Allah tore up the mountain (Sinai which is not mentioned) by the roots and shook it over their heads to terrify them, saying, "Receive the Law which we have given you with a resolution to keep it" (Koran chapt. xlx. 170). Much of this story is from the Talmud (Abodah Sar. 2, 2, Tract Sabbath, etc.) whence Al-Islam borrowed so much of its Judaism, as it took Christianity from the Apocryphal New Testament. This tradition is still held by the Israelites, says Mr. Rodwell (p. 333) who refers it to a misunderstanding of Exod. xix. 17, rightly rendered in the E. version "at the nether part of the mountain." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1154" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1155" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Azghán"=the camel-litters in which women travel. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1155" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1156" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> to joy foes and dismay friends. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1156" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1157" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Whose eyes became white (<em>i.e.</em> went blind) with mourning for his son Joseph (Koran, chapt. xii. 84). He recovered his sight when his face was covered with the shirt which Gabriel had given to the youth after his brethren had thrown him into the well. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1157" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1158" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Poison King" (Persian); or "Flower-King" (Arabic). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1158" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1159" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A delicate allusion to the size of her hips and back parts, in which volume is, I have said, greatly admired for the best of reasons. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1159" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1160" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>All Prophets had some manual trade and that of David was making coats of mail, which he invented, for before his day men used plate-armour. So "Allah softened the iron for him" and in his hands it became like wax (Koran xxi., xxxiv., etc.). Hence a good coat of mail is called "Davidean." I have noticed (First Footsteps, p. 33 and elsewhere) the homage paid to the blacksmith on the principle which made Mulciber (Malik Kabir) a god. The myth of David inventing mail possibly arose from his peculiarly fighting career. Moslems venerate Dáúd on account of his extraordinary devotion; nor has this view of his character ceased: a modern divine preferred him to "all characters in history." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1160" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1161" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Travel by Night," said the Prophet, "when the plagues of earth (scorpions, serpents, etc.) afflict ye not." Yet the night-march in Arabia is detestable (Pilgrimage iii.) <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1161" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1162" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This form of ceremony is called "Istikbál" (coming forth to greet) and is regulated by the severest laws of etiquette. As a rule the greater the distance (which may be a minimum of one step) the higher the honour. Easterns infinitely despise strangers who ignore these vitals of politeness. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1162" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1163" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> he will be a desert Nimrod and the game will delight to be killed by him. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1163" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1164" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This serves to keep the babe's eyes free from inflammation. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1164" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1165" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> Crown of the Kings of amorous Blandishment. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1165" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1166" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lane (i. 531) translates "the grey down." The Arabs use "Akhzar" (prop. "green") in many senses, fresh, grey-hued, etc. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1166" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1167" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Allusion to the well-known black banners of the house of Abbas. The Persians describe the growth of hair on a fair young face by, "His cheeks went into mourning for the loss of their charms." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1167" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1168" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Káfir" a Koranic word meaning Infidel, the active participle of Kufr=Infidelity <em>i.e.</em> rejecting the mission of Mohammed. It is insulting and in Turkish has been degraded to "Giaour." Here it means black, as Hafiz of Shiraz terms a cheek-mole "Hindu" <em>i.e.</em> dark-skinned and idolatrous. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1168" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1169" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alluding to the travel of Moses (Koran chapt. xviii.) with Al-Khizr (the "evergreen Prophet") who had drunk of the Fountain of Life and enjoyed flourishing and continual youth. Moses is represented as the external and superficial religionist; the man of outsight; Al-Khizr as the spiritual and illuminated man of insight. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1169" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1170" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The lynx was used like the lion in Ancient Egypt and the Chita-leopard in India: I have never seen or heard of it in these days. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1170" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1171" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Sukúr," whence our "Saker" the falcon, not to be confounded with the old Falco Sacer, the Gr. <span xml:lang="el">ἱέραξ</span>. Falconry which, like all arts, began in Egypt, is an extensive subject throughout Moslem lands. I must refer my readers to "Falconry in the Valley of the Indus" (Van Voorst, 1852) and a long note in Pilgrimage iii. 71. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1171" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1172" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It was not respectful to pitch their camp within dog-bark. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1172" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1173" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Easterns attach great importance to softness and smoothness of skin and they are right: a harsh rough epidermis spoils sport with the handsomest woman. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1173" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1174" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Canticles vii. 8: Hosea xiv. 6. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1174" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1175" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The mesmeric attraction of like to like. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1175" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1176" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Taswif"=saying "Sauf," I will do it soon. It is a beautiful word—etymologically. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1176" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1177" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A very far-fetched allusion. The face of the beloved springing from an unbuttoned robe is the moon rising over the camp in the hollow (<em>bat' há</em>). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1177" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1178" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Kasabát"="canes," long beads, bugles. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1178" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1179" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Koran, xcvi. 5. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1179" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1180" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Both words (masc. and fem.) mean "dear, excellent, highly-prized." The tale is the Arab form of the European "Patient Griselda" and shows a higher conception of womanly devotion, because Azizah, despite her wearisome weeping, is a girl of high intelligence and Aziz is a vicious zany, weak as water and wilful as wind. The phenomenon (not rare in life) is explained by the couplet:—</p>
					<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">I love my love with an S—</div>
								<div class="line">Because he is stupid and not intellectual.</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>This fond affection of clever women for fools can be explained only by the law of unlikeness which mostly governs sexual unions in physical matters; and its appearance in the story gives novelty and point. Aziz can plead only the violence of his passion which distinguished him as a lover among the mob of men who cannot love anything beyond themselves. And none can pity him for losing a member which he so much abused. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1180" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1181" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Sháhid," the <em>index</em>, the pointer raised in testimony: the comparison of the Eastern and the Western names is curious. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1181" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1182" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Musk is one of the perfumes of the Moslem Heaven; and "musky" is much used in verse to signify scented and dark-brown. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1182" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1183" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Mandíl": these kerchiefs are mostly oblong, the short sides being worked with gold and coloured silk, and often fringed, while the two others are plain. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1183" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1184" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Rayhání," of the Ocymum Basilicum or sweet basil: a delicate handwriting, so called from the pen resembling a leaf (?) See vol. i. p. 128. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1184" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1185" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An idiom meaning "something unusual happened." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1185" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1186" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An action common in grief and regret: here the lady would show that she sighs for union with her beloved. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1186" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1187" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lane (i. 608) has a valuable note on the language of signs, from M. du Vigneau's "Secretaire Turc," etc. (Paris, 1688), Baron von Hammer-Purgstall ("Mines de l'Orient," No. 1, Vienna, 1809) and Marcel's "Contes du Cheykh El-Mohdy" (Paris, 1833). It is practised in Africa as well as in Asia. At Abeokuta in Yoruba a man will send a symbolical letter in the shape of cowries, palm-nuts and other kernels strung on rice-straw; and sharp wits readily interpret the meaning. A specimen is given in p. 262 of Miss Tucker's "Abbeokuta; or Sunrise within the Tropics." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1187" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1188" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mr. Payne (ii. 227) translates "Hawá al-'Uzrí" by "the love of the Beni Udhra, an Arabian tribe famous for the passion and devotion with which love was practised among them." See Night dclxxxiii. I understand it as "excusable love" which, for want of a better term, is here translated "platonic." It is, however, more like the old "bundling" of Wales and Northern England; and allows all the pleasures but one, the toyings which the French call <i><span xml:lang="fr">les plaisirs de la petite oie</span></i>; a term my dear old friend Fred. Hankey derived from <i><span xml:lang="fr">la petite voie</span></i>. The Afghans know it as "Námzad-bází" or betrothed-play (Pilgrimage, ii. 56); the Abyssinians as eye-love; and the Kafirs as Slambuka a Shlabonka, for which see the traveller Delegorgue. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1188" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1189" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Turk" in Arabic and Persian poetry means a plunderer, a robber. Thus Hafiz: "Agar án Turk-i-Shirázi ba-dast árad dil-i-márá," If that Shirazi (ah, the Turk!) would deign to take my heart in hand, etc. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1189" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1190" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Názir," a steward or an eye (a "looker"). The idea is borrowed from Al-Hariri (Assemblies, xiii.), and <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1190" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1191" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Hájib," a groom of the chambers, a chamberlain; also an eyebrow. See Al-Hariri, ibid. xiii. and xxii. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1191" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1192" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This gesture speaks for itself: it is that of a dyer staining a cloth. The "Sabbágh's" shop is the usual small recess, open to the street and showing pans of various dyes sunk like "dog-laps" in the floor. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1192" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1193" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Arab. Sabt (from sabata, he kept Sabt) and the Heb. "Sabbath" both mean Saturn's day, Saturday, transferred by some unknown process throughout Christendom to Sunday. The change is one of the most curious in the history of religions. If there be a single command stronger than all others it is "Keep the Saturday holy." It was so kept by the Founder of Christianity; the order was never abrogated and yet most Christians are not aware that Sabbath, or "Sawbath," means Saturn's day, the "Shiyár" of the older Arabs. And to complete its degradation "Sabbat" in French and German means a <i><span xml:lang="fr">criaillerie</span></i>, a "row," a disorder, an abominable festival of Hexen (witches). This monstrous absurdity can be explained only by aberrations of sectarian zeal, of party spirit in religion. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1193" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1194" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The men who cry to prayer. The first was Bilál, the Abyssinian slave bought and manumitted by Abu Bakr. His simple cry was "I testify there is no Iláh (god) but Allah (God)! Come ye to prayers!" Caliph Omar, with the Prophet's permission, added, "I testify that Mohammed is the Apostle of Allah." The prayer-cry which is beautiful and human, contrasting pleasantly with the brazen clang of the bell, now is</p>
					<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">Allah is Almighty (bis).</div>
								<div class="line">I declare no god is there but Allah (bis).</div>
								<div class="line">Hie ye to Rogation (Hayya=halumma).</div>
								<div class="line">Hie ye to Salvation (Faláh=prosperity, Paradise).</div>
								<div class="line">("Hie ye to Edification," a Shi'ah adjunct).</div>
								<div class="line">Prayer is better than sleep (in the morning, also bis).</div>
								<div class="line">No god is there but Allah.</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>This prayer-call is similarly worded and differently pronounced and intoned throughout Al-Islam. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1194" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1195" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> a graceful youth of Al-Hijaz, the Moslem Holy Land, whose "sons" claim especial privileges. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1195" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1196" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "harf"=a letter, as we should say a syllable. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1196" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1197" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>She uses the masculine "fatá," in order to make the question more mysterious. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1197" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1198" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The fountain-bowl is often ornamented by a rude mosaic of black and white marble with enlivenments of red stone or tile in complicated patterns. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1198" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1199" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Kubád"=shaddock (citrus decumana): the huge orange which Captain Shaddock brought from the West Indies; it is the Anglo-Indian pompelmoose, vulg. pummelo. An excellent bitter is made out of the rind steeped in spirits. Citronworts came from India whence they spread throughout the tropics: they were first introduced into Europe by the heroic Joam de Castro and planted in his garden at Cintra where their descendants are still seen. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1199" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1200" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. Bakláwah, Turk. Baklává, a kind of pastry with blanched almonds bruised small between layers of dough, baked in the oven and cut into lozenges. It is still common. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1200" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1201" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Her just fear was that the young woman might prove "too clever by half" for her simpleton cousin. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1201" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1202" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The curse is pregnant with meaning. On Judgement-day the righteous shall arise with their faces shining gloriously: hence the blessing, "Bayyaz' Allaho wajh-ak" (=Allah whiten thy countenance!). But the wicked shall appear with faces scorched black and deformed by horror (Koran xxiv.): hence "God blacken thy brow!" I may observe that Easterns curse, the curse being everywhere the language of excited destructiveness; but only Westerns, and these chiefly English, swear, a practice utterly meaningless. "Damn <em>it</em>" without specifying what the "it" is, sounds like the speech of a naughty child anxious only to use a "wicked word." "Damn <em>you</em>!" is intelligible all the world over. It has given rise to "les goddams" in France; "Godámes" in the Brazil and "Gotáma" amongst the Somal of Eastern Africa, who learn it in Aden. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1202" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1203" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Zardah," usually rice dressed with saffron and honey, from Pers. "Zard," saffron, yellow. See Night dccxii. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1203" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1204" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vulgarly called "knuckle-bone," concerning which I shall have something to say. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1204" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1205" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A bit of wood used in the children's game called "Táb" which resembles our tip-cat (Lane M. E. chapt. xvii.) <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1205" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1206" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Balah," the unripened date, which is considered a laxative and eaten in hot weather. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1206" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1207" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lane (i. 611), quoting Al-Kazwíní, notes that the date-stone is called "Nawá" (dim. "Nawáyah") which also means distance, absence, severance. Thus the lady threatens to cast off her greedy and sleepy lover. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1207" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1208" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The pod of the carob-bean which changes little after being plucked is an emblem of constancy. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1208" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1209" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This dirham=48 grains avoir. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1209" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1210" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The weight would be round: also "Hadíd" (=iron) means sharp or piercing (Koran chapt. vii. 21). The double "swear" is intended to be very serious. Moreover iron conjures away fiends: when a water-spout or a sand-devil (called Shaytán also in Arabia) approaches, you point the index at the Jinn and say, "Iron, O thou ill-omened one!" Amongst the Ancient Egyptians the metal was ill-omened being the bones of Typhon, so here, possibly, we have an instance of early homœopathy—<span xml:lang="la">similia similibus</span>. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1210" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1211" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Probably fermented to a kind of wine. The insipid fruit (Unnáb) which looks like an apple in miniature, is much used in stews, etc. It is the fruit (Nabak classically Nabik) of Rhamnus Nabeca (or Sidrat) also termed Zizyphus Jujuba, seu Spina Christi because fabled to have formed the crown of thorns: in the English market this plum is called Chinese Japonica. I have described it in Pilgrimage ii. 205, and have noticed the infusion of the leaves for washing the dead (ibid. ii. 105): this is especially the use of the "Ber" in India, where the leaves are superstitiously held peculiarly pure. Our dictionaries translate "Sidr" by "Lote-tree"; and no wonder that believers in Homeric writ feel their bile aroused by so poor a realisation of the glorious myth. The Homerids probably alluded to Hashish or Bhang. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1211" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1212" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Azrár": the open collar of the Saub ("Tobe") or long loose dress is symptomatic. The Eastern button is on the same principle as ours (both having taken the place of the classical fibula); but the Moslem affects a loop (like those to which we attach our "frogs") and utterly ignores a button-hole. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1212" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1213" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alluding to the ceremonious circumambulation of the Holy House at Meccah, a notable irreverence worthy of Kneph-town (Canopus). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1213" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1214" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The ear-drop is the penis and the anklet its crown of glory. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1214" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1215" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Equivalent to our "Alas! Alas!" which, by the by, no one ever says. "Awáh," like "Yauh," is now a woman's word although used by Al-Hariri (Assembly of Basrah) and so Al-awwáh=one who cries from grief "Awáh." A favourite conversational form is "Yehh" with the aspirate exasperated; but it is an expression of astonishment rather than sorrow. It enters into Europe travel-books. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1215" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1216" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In the text "burst her gall-bladder." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1216" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1217" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The death of Azizah is told with true Arab pathos and simplicity: it still draws tears from the eyes of the Badawi, and I never read it without a "lump in the throat." <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1217" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1218" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Inshallah bukra!" a universal saying which is the horror of travellers. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1218" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1219" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I have explained "Nu'uman's flower" as the anemone which in Grecised Arabic is "Anúmiyá." Here they are strewed over the tomb; often the flowers are planted in a small bed of mould sunk in the upper surface. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1219" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1220" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Barzakh" lit. a bar, a partition: in the Koran (chapts. xxiii. and xxxv.) the space or the place between death and resurrection where souls are stowed away. It corresponds after a fashion with the classical Hades and the Limbus (Limbo) of Christendom, <em>e.g.</em> Limbus patrum, infantum, fatuorum. But it must not be confounded with Al-A'aráf, the Moslem purgatory. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1220" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1221" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Zukák al-Nakíb," the latter word has been explained as a chief, leader, head man. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1221" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1222" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Moslems never stand up at such times, for a spray of urine would make their clothes ceremonially impure: hence the scrupulous will break up with stick or knife the hard ground in front of them. A certain pilgrim was reported to have made this blunder which is hardly possible in Moslem dress. A high personage once asked me if it was true that he killed a man who caught him in a standing position; and I found to my surprise that the absurd scandal was already twenty years old. After urining the Moslem wipes the <em>os penis</em> with one to three bits of stone, clay or handfuls of earth, and he must perform Wuzu before he can pray. Tournefort (Voyage au Levant iii. 335) tells a pleasant story of certain Christians at Constantinople who powdered with "<em>Poivre-d'Inde</em>" the stones in a wall where the Moslems were in the habit of rubbing the <em>os penis</em> by way of wiping. The same author (ii. 336) strongly recommends a translation of Rabelais' <em>Torcheculative</em> chapter (Lib. i., chapt. 13) for the benefit of Mohammedans. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1222" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1223" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Nuhás ahmar," lit. red brass. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1223" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1224" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The cup is that between the lady's legs. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1224" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1225" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A play upon "Sák"=calf, or leg, and "Sákí," a cup-bearer. The going round (Tawáf) and the running (Sa'í) allude to the circumambulation of the Ka'abah, and the running between Mount Safá and Marwah (Pilgrimage ii. 58, and iii. 343). A religious Moslem would hold the allusion highly irreverent. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1225" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1226" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lane (i. 614) never saw a woman wearing such kerchief which is deshabille. It is either spread over the head or twisted turband-wise. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1226" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1227" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The "Kasabah" was about two fathoms of long measure, and sometimes 12½ feet; but the length has been reduced. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1227" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1228" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Bat and ball," or hockey on horseback (Polo) is one of the earliest Persian games as shown by every illustrated copy of Firdausi's "Shahnámeh." This game was played with a Kurrah or small hand-ball and a long thin bat crooked at the end called in Persian Chaugán and in Arabic Saulaján. Another sense of the word is given in the Burhán-i-Káti, translated by Vullers (Lex. Persico-Latinum), a large bandy with bent head to which is hung an iron ball, also called Kaukabah (our "morning-star") and like the umbrella it denotes the grandees of the court. The same Kaukabah particularly distinguished one of the Marquesses of Waterford. This Polo corresponds with the folliculus, the pallone, the baloun-game (<span xml:lang="fr">moyen âge</span>) of Europe, where the horse is not such a companion of man; and whereof the classics sang:—</p>
					<div class="c002 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">
									<span xml:lang="la">Folle decet pueros ludere, folle senes.</span>
								</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>In these days we should spell otherwise the "folle" of seniors playing at the ball or lawn-tennis. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1228" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1229" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>"Dalíl" means a guide; "Dalílah," a woman who misguides, a bawd. See the Tale of Dalílah the Crafty, Night dcxcviii. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1229" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1230" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> she was a martyr. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1230" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1231" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arab. "Ghashím" a popular and insulting term, our "Johnny Raw." Its use is shown in Pilgrimage i. 110. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1231" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1232" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bathers pay on leaving the Hammam; all enter without paying. <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1232" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1233" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><em>i.e.</em> she swore him upon his sword and upon the Koran: a loaf of bread is sometimes added. See Lane (i. 615). <a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-1233" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
