<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Translator’s Foreword</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter">
		<section data-parent="volume-16" id="foreword-16" epub:type="foreword">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Translator’s Foreword</h2>
			<p>This volume has been entitled “<b>The New Arabian Nights</b>,” a name now hackneyed because applied to its contents as far back as <time>1819</time> in Henry Weber’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tales of the East</i>, (Edinburgh, Ballantyne).</p>
			<p>The original <abbr>MS.</abbr> was brought to France by al-Káhin Diyúnisiús Sháwísh, a Syrian priest of the Congregation of <abbr>St.</abbr> Basil, whose name has been Frenchified to Don Dennis (or Denys) Chavis. He was a student at the European College of al-Kadís Ithanásiús (<abbr>St.</abbr> Athanasius) in Rúmiyah the Grand (Constantinople) and was summoned by the Minister of State, Baron de Breteuil, to Paris, where he presently became “Teacher of the Arabic Tongue at the College of the Sultán, King of Fransá in Bárís (Paris) the Great.” He undertook (probably to supply the loss of Galland’s <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> <abbr>MS.</abbr> volume) a continuation of The Nights (proper), and wrote with his own hand the last two leaves of the third tome, which ends with three instead of four couplets: thus he completed Kamar al-Zamán (Night <span epub:type="z3998:roman">CCLXXXI</span>⁠–⁠<span epub:type="z3998:roman">CCCXXIX</span>) and the following tales:⁠—</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>The History of the Sleeper and the Waker (Nights <span epub:type="z3998:roman">CCCXXX</span>⁠–⁠<span epub:type="z3998:roman">CCCLXXIX</span>).</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The History of Warlock and the Cook (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">CCCLXXX</span>⁠–⁠<span epub:type="z3998:roman">CD</span>).</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The History of the Prisoner in the Bímáristán or Madhouse (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">CD</span>⁠–⁠<span epub:type="z3998:roman">CDXXVII</span>).</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The History of Ghánim the Thrall o’ Love (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">CDXXVIII</span>⁠–⁠<span epub:type="z3998:roman">CDLXXIV</span>).</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The History of Zayn al-Asnám and the King of the Jánn (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">CDLXXV</span>⁠–⁠<span epub:type="z3998:roman">CDXCI</span>).</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The History of Alaeddin (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">CDXCII</span>⁠–⁠<span epub:type="z3998:roman">DLXIX</span>), and</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The History of Ten Wazirs (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">DLXX</span>).</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p>The copy breaks off at folio 320, r<sup>o</sup> in the middle of Night <span epub:type="z3998:roman">DCXXXI</span>, and the date (given at the end of Night <span epub:type="z3998:roman">CDXXVII</span>, folio 139) is <time datetime="1787-02"><i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Shubát</i> (February), <abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 1787</time>. This is the <abbr>MS.</abbr> numbered <i xml:lang="fr">Supplément Arabe</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 1716.</p>
			<p>In Paris, <span epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dom</span> Chavis forgathered with <abbr>M.</abbr> Cazotte, a littérateur of the category “light,” an <i xml:lang="fr">ingénieux écrivain</i>, distinguished for “gaiety, delicacy, wit and Attic elegance,” and favorably known for (inter alia) his poem “Olivier,” his “<span xml:lang="fr">Diable Amoureux</span>,” “The Lord Impromptu,” and a travesty of The Nights called <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">The Thousand and One Fopperies</i>. The two agreed to collaborate, the Syrian translating the Arabic into French, and the Parisian metamorphosing the manner and matter to “the style and taste of the day”; that is to say, working up an exaggerated imitation, a caricature, of Galland. The work appeared, according to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <i epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. G.</i> Ellis, of the British Museum, who kindly sent me these notes, in <i xml:lang="fr">Le Cabinet | des Fées, | ou | Collection choisie | des Contes des Fées, | et autres contes merveilleux, | ornés de figures. | Tome trente-huitième-(quarante-unième). | À Genève, | chez Bárde, Manget et Compagnie, | Imprimeurs-Libraires. | Et se trouve à Paris | Rue et Hôtel Serpente.</i> | <time>1788</time>⁠–⁠<time datetime="1789">89</time>, 8<sup>o</sup><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7746" id="noteref-7746" epub:type="noteref">7746</a> |. The half-title is <i xml:lang="fr">Les Veilliées Persanes</i>, and on the second title-page is <i xml:lang="fr">Les Veilliées | du | Sultan Schahriar, avec | la Sultane Scheherazade; | Histoires incroyables, amusantes, et morales, | traduites de l’Arabe par <abbr>M.</abbr> Cazotte et | <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">D.</abbr> Chavis. Faisant suite aux mille et une Nuits. | Ornées de 12 belles gravures. | Tome premier (⁠—quatrième) | à Genève, | chez Barde, Manget et Comp<sup>e</sup> | <time>1793</time></i>. This 8vo.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7747" id="noteref-7747" epub:type="noteref">7747</a> bears the abridged title, <i xml:lang="fr">La Suite des mille et une Nuits, Contes Arabes, traduits par <span epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dom</span> Chavis et <abbr>M.</abbr> Cazotte</i>. The work was printed with illustrations at Geneva and in Paris, <time datetime="1788" epub:type="z3998:roman">MDCCLXXXVIII</time>, and formed the last four volumes (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVIII</span>⁠–⁠<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLI</span>) of the great Recueil, the Cabinet des Fées, published at Geneva from <abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> <time>1788</time> to <time>1793</time>.</p>
			<p>The following is a complete list of the histories, as it appears in the English translation, lengthily entitled, “Arabian Tales; | or, | a Continuation | of the | Arabian Nights Entertainments. | Consisting of | Stories | Related by the | Sultana of the Indies | to divert her Husband from the Performance of a rash vow; | Exhibiting | A most interesting view of the Religion, Laws, | Manners, Customs, Arts, and Literature | of the | Nations of the East, | And | Affording a rich Fund of the most pleasing Amusement, | which fictitious writings can supply. | In Four Volumes | newly translated from the original Arabic into French | By <span epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dom</span> Chavis | a native Arab and <abbr>M.</abbr> Cazotte, Member | of the Academy of Dijon. | And translated from the French into English | By Robert Heron. | Edinburgh: | Printed for Bell and Bradfute, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dickson, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Balfour, | and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Hill, Edinburgh; | and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. G. J.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Robinson, London | <time datetime="1792" epub:type="z3998:roman">MDCCXCII</time>”</p>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<p>The Robber-Caliph; or, adventures of Haroun-Alraschid, with the Princess of Persia and the fair Zutulbe.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7748" id="noteref-7748" epub:type="noteref">7748</a></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Power of Destiny; or, Story of the Journey of Giafar to Damascus, comprehending the Adventures of Chebib (Habíb) and his family.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Story of Halechalbé (Ali Chelebí) and the Unknown Lady; or, the Bimaristan.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Idiot; or, Story of Xailoun.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7749" id="noteref-7749" epub:type="noteref">7749</a></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Adventures of Simustafa (=“<i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">Sí</i>” for Sídí “Mustafa”) and the Princess Ilsatilsone (<i epub:type="ar-Latn">Lizzat al-Lusún</i> = Delight of Tongues?).</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Adventures of Alibengiad, Sultan of Herat, and of the False Birds of Paradise.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>History of Sankarib and his two Viziers.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>History of the Family of the Schebandad (<i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Shahbandar</i> = Consul) of Surat.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Lover of the Stars: or, Abil Hasan’s Story.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>History of Captain Tranchemont and his Brave Companions: Debil Hasen’s Story.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Dream of Valid Hasan.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Story of Bohetzad and his Ten Viziers (with eleven subsidiary tales).<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7750" id="noteref-7750" epub:type="noteref">7750</a></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Story of Habib and Dorathal-Goase (=<i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Durrat al-Ghawwás</i> the Pearl of the Diver); or, the Arabian Knight.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Story of Illabousatrous (?) of Schal-Goase, and of Camarilzaman.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Story of the Lady of the Beautiful Tresses.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The History of Habib and Dorathal-Goase; or, the Arabian Knight continued.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>History of Maugraby (Al-Maghrabi = the Moor); or, the Magician.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>History of Halaiaddin (’Alà al-Din, Alaeddin, Aladdin), Prince of Persia.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>History of Yemaladdin (Jamál al-Dín), Prince of Great Katay.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>History of Baha-Ildur, Prince of Cinigae.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>History of Badrildinn (Badr al-Dín), Prince of Tartary.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>History of the Amours of Maugraby with Auhata al-Kawakik (=<i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Ukht al-Kawákib</i>, Sister of the Planets), daughter of the King of Egypt.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>History of the Birth of Maugraby.</p>
				</li>
			</ol>
			<p>Of these thirty-four only five (<abbr>MS.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVII</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXII</span>) have not been found in the original Arabic.</p>
			<p>Public opinion was highly favourable to the “Suite” when first issued. Orientalism was at that time new to Europe, and the general was startled by its novelties, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> by “Women wearing drawers and trousers like their husbands, and men arrayed in loose robes like their wives, yet at the same time cherishing, as so many goats, each a venerable length of beard.” (Heron’s Preface.) They found its “phænomena so remote from the customs and manners of Europe, that, when exhibited as entering into the ordinary system of human affairs, they could not fail to confer a considerable share of amusive novelty on the characters and events with which they were connected.” (Ditto, Preface.) Jonathan Scott roundly pronounced the continuation a forgery. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Patrick Russell (History of Aleppo, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 385) had no good opinion of it, and Caussin de Perceval (père, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 40⁠–⁠46) declared the version <i xml:lang="fr">éloignée du goût Orientale</i>; yet he retranslated the tales from the original Arabic (<i xml:lang="fr">Continués</i>, Paris, <time>1806</time>), and in this he was followed by Gauttier, while Southey borrowed the idea of his beautiful romance, Thalaba the Destroyer, now in Lethe from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Maughraby</i>. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z998:name-title">A. G.</abbr> Ellis considers these tales as good as the old “Arabian Nights,” and my friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z998:name-title">W. F.</abbr> Kirby, (Appendix to The Nights, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 476), quite agrees with him that Chavis and Cazotte’s Continuation is well worthy of republication in its entirety. It remained for the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Edinburgh Review</i>, in one of those ignorant and scurrilous articles with which it periodically outrages truth and good taste (<abbr>No.</abbr> 535, <time datetime="1886-07">July, 1886</time>), to state, “Cazotte published his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Suite des Mille et une Nuits</i>, a barefaced forgery, in <time>1785</time>.” A barefaced forgery! when the original of twenty-eight tales out of thirty-four are perfectly well known, and when sundry of these appear in <abbr>MSS.</abbr> of “The Thousand Nights and a Night.”</p>
			<p>The following is a list of the Tales (widely differing from those of Chavis and Cazotte) which appeared in the version of Caussin de Perceval.</p>
			<blockquote xml:lang="fr">
				<header>
					<p>Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span></p>
				</header>
				<p>Les | Mille et une Nuits, | Contes Arabes, | Traduits en Français | Par <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Galland, | Membre de l’Académie des Inscriptions et | Belles-Lettres, Professeur de Langue Arabe | au Collége Royal; | Continués | Par <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Caussin de Perceval, | Professeur de Langue Arabe au Collége Impérial. | Tome huitième. | à Paris, | chez Le Normant, <abbr>Imp.</abbr>-Libraire, | Rue des Prêtres Saint-Germain-l’Auxerrois. | <time>1806</time>.</p>
				<ol>
					<li>
						<p>Nouvelles aventures du calife Haroun Alraschid; ou histoire de la petite fille de Chosroès Anouschirvan. (Gauttier, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire du Khalyfe de Baghdad</i>: <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> 117.)</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Le Bimaristan, ou histoire du jeune Marchand de Bagdad et de la dame inconnue.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Le médecin et le jeune traiteur de Bagdad.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Histoire du Sage Hicar. (Gauttier, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire du Sage Heycar</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> 313).</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Histoire du roi Azadbakht, ou des dix Visirs.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Histoire du marchand devenu malheureux.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Histoire du marchand imprudent et de ses deux enfants.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Histoire d’ Abousaber, ou de l’homme patient.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Histoire du prince Behezad.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Histoire du roi Dadbin, ou de la vertueuse Aroua.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Histoire du roi Bakhtzeman.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Histoire du roi Khadidan.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Histoire du roi Beherkerd.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Histoire du roi Ilanschah et d’Abouteman.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Histoire du roi Ibrahim et de son fils.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Histoire du Soleïman-schah.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Histoire de l’esclave sauvé du supplice.</p>
					</li>
				</ol>
			</blockquote>
			<blockquote xml:lang="fr">
				<header>
					<p>Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span></p>
				</header>
				<ol start="18">
					<li>
						<p>Attaf ou l’homme généreux. (Gauttier, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire de l’habitant de Damas</i>; <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> 234.)</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Histoire du Prince Habib et de Dorrat Algoase.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Histoire du roi Sapor, souverain des îles Bellour; de Camar Alzemann, fille du génie Alatrous, et Dorrat Algoase. (Gauttier, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> 64.)</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Histoire de Naama et de Naam.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Histoire d’Alaeddin.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Histoire d’Abou Mohammed Alkeslan.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Histoire d’Aly Mohammed le joaillier, ou du faux calife.</p>
					</li>
				</ol>
			</blockquote>
			<p>I need hardly offer any observations upon these tales, as they have been discussed in the preceding pages.</p>
			<p>By an error of the late <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Reinaud (for which see <abbr>p.</abbr> 39 <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Histoire d’ ’Alâ al-Dîn</i> by <i epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</i> <i epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</i> Zotenberg, Paris, Imprimerie Nationale, <time datetime="1888" epub:type="z3998:roman">MDCCCLXXXVIII</time>) the <abbr>MS.</abbr> <i xml:lang="fr">Supplément Arabe, <abbr>No.</abbr> 1716</i>, in the writing of <span epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dom</span> Chavis has been confounded with <abbr>No.</abbr> 1723, which is not written by the Syrian priest but which contains the originals of the Cazotte Continuation as noted by <i epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</i> <i epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</i> de Perceval (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les Mille et une Nuits</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span> <abbr>Préf.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 17, et <abbr>seqq.</abbr>). It is labelled <i xml:lang="fr">Histoires tirées la plupart des Mille et une Nuits | Supplément Arabe | Volume de</i> 742 pages. The thick quarto measures centimètres 20½ long by 16 wide; the binding is apparently Italian and the paper is European, but the filegrane or watermark, which is of three varieties, a coronet, a lozenge-shaped bunch of circles and a nondescript, may be Venetian or French. It contains 765 pages, paginated after European fashion, but the last eleven leaves are left blank reducing the number written to 742; and the terminal note, containing the date, is on the last leaf. Each page numbers 15 lines and each leaf has its catchword (<i xml:lang="fr">mot de rappel</i>). It is not ordered by <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">karrás</i> or quires; but is written upon 48 sets of 4 double leaves. The text is in a fair Syrian hand, but not so flowing as that of <abbr>No.</abbr> 1716, by Sháwísh himself, which the well-known Arabist, Baron de Slane, described as <i xml:lang="fr">Bonne écriture orientale de la fin du <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span><sup>e</sup> Siècle</i>. The colophon conceals or omits the name of the scribe, but records the dates of incept <time datetime="1772-01">Kánún <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span><sup>d</sup> (the Syrian winter-month January) <abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 1772</time>; and of conclusion <time datetime="1772-04">Naysán (April) of the same year</time>. It has headlines disposed recto and verso, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr>,</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>
					<span>Haykár</span>
					<span>⸺</span>
					<span>Al-Hakím,</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">and parentheses in the text after European fashion with an imperfect list at the beginning. A complete index is furnished at the end. The following are the order and pagination of the fourteen stories:⁠—</p>
			<table>
				<tr>
					<td>1.</td>
					<td>The King of Persia and his Ten Wazirs</td>
					<td><abbr>pp.</abbr> 1 to 62</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>2.</td>
					<td>Say of the Sage Haykár</td>
					<td>140</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>3.</td>
					<td>History of King Sabúr and the Three Wise Men</td>
					<td>183</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>4.</td>
					<td>The Daughter of Kisrà the King (Al Bundukâni)</td>
					<td>217</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>5.</td>
					<td>The Caliph and the Three Kalandars</td>
					<td>266</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>6.</td>
					<td>Julnár the Sea-born</td>
					<td>396</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>7.</td>
					<td>The Duenna, the Linguist-dame and the King’s Son</td>
					<td>476</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>8.</td>
					<td>The Tale of the Warlock and the young Cook of Baghdad</td>
					<td>505</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>9.</td>
					<td>The Man in the Bímáristán or Madhouse</td>
					<td>538</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>10.</td>
					<td>The Tale of Attáf the Syrian</td>
					<td>588</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>11.</td>
					<td>The History of Sultan Habíb and Durrat al-Ghawwás</td>
					<td>628</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>12.</td>
					<td>The Caliph and the Fisherman</td>
					<td>686</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>13.</td>
					<td>The Cock and the Fox</td>
					<td>718</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>14.</td>
					<td>The Fowl-let and the Fowler</td>
					<td>725 to 739 (finis)</td>
				</tr>
			</table>
			<p>Upon these tales I would be permitted to offer a few observations. <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> begins with a Christian formula:⁠—“In the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost” (Rúhu’l-Kudus); and it is not translated, because it is a mere replica of the Ten Wazirs (<abbr>Suppl.</abbr> <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 55⁠–⁠151). The second, containing “The Sage Haykár,” which is famous in folklore throughout the East, begins with the orthodox Muslim “Bismillah,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> “King Sapor” is prefaced by a Christian form which to the Trinitarian formula adds, “Allah being One”: this, again, is not translated, because it repeats the “Ebony Horse” (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 1). <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, which opens with the Bismillah, is found in the Sabbágh <abbr>MS.</abbr> of The Nights (see <abbr>Suppl.</abbr> <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>) as the <i xml:lang="fr">Histoire de Haroun al-Raschid et de la descendante de Chosroès</i>. <cite>Albondoqani</cite> (Nights <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXX</span>⁠–⁠<span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXVII</span>). <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, which also has the Muslim invocation, is followed by the “Caliph and the Three Kalandars,” where, after the fashion of this our <abbr>MS.</abbr>, the episodes (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, 104⁠–⁠130), are taken bodily from “The Porter and the Three Ladies of Baghdad” (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 82), and are converted into a separate History. <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> has no title to be translated, being a replica of the long sea-tale in <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, 264. <abbr>Nos.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span> lack initiatory invocation betraying Christian or Muslim provenance. <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span> is the History of Sí Mustafá and of Shaykh Shaháb al-Dín in the Turkish Tales: it also occurs in the Sabbágh <abbr>MS.</abbr> (Nights <span epub:type="z3998:roman">CCCLXXXVI</span>⁠–⁠<span epub:type="z3998:roman">CDVIII</span>). The Bímáristán (<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>), alias Ali Chalabi (Halechalbé), has already appeared in my <abbr>Suppl.</abbr> <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> 49. <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>, “The Caliph and the Fisherman,” makes Harun al-Rashid the hero of the tale in “The Fisherman and the Jinni” (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 38); it calls the ensorcelled King of the Black Islands Mahmúd, and his witch of a wife Sitt al-Mulúk, and it also introduces into the Court of the Great Caliph Hasan Shumán and Ahmad al-Danaf, the prominent personages in “The Rogueries of Dalílah” (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> 144) and its sister tale (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> 172). The two last Histories, which are ingenious enough, also lack initial formulæ.</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Russell (the historian of Aleppo) brought back with him a miscellaneous collection comprising⁠—</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Al-Bundukani, or the Robber Caliph;</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Power of Destiny (Attaf the Syrian);</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Ali Chelebi, or the Bimaristan;</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>King Sankharib and the Sage Haykar;</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Bohetzad (Azádbakht) and the Ten Wazirs; and, lastly,</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Habib, or the Arabian Knight.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Encyclopedia Britannica</i> (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span> <abbr>edit.</abbr> of <time datetime="1876" epub:type="z3998:roman">MDCCCLXXVI</time>), which omits the name of Professor Galland, one of the marking Orientalists in his own day, has not ignored Jacques Cazotte, remarkable for chequered life and noble death. Born in <time>1720</time>, at Dijon, where his father was Chancellor for the Province of Burgundy, he studied with the Jesuits at home; and, having passed through the finishing process in Paris, he was introduced to public life by the <i xml:lang="fr">Administration de la Marine</i>. He showed early taste for poetry as well as prose, and composed songs, tales, and an opera⁠—the <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">Thousand and one Fopperies</i>. His physique is described as a tall figure, with regular features, expressive blue eyes, and fine hair, which he wore long. At twenty-seven he became a commissary in the office and was presently sent as Comptroller to the Windward Islands, including the French Colony Martinique, which then as now was famous for successful womankind. At these head quarters he became intimate with Père Lavalette, Superior of the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">S.J.</abbr> Mission, and he passed some years of a pleasant and not unintellectual career. Returning to Paris on leave of absence he fell in with a countrywoman and an old family friend, Madame La Poissonnier, who had been appointed head nurse to the Duke of Burgundy; and, as the child in her charge required lulling to sleep, Cazotte composed the favourite <i xml:lang="fr">romances (ballads)</i>, <i xml:lang="fr">Tout au beau milieu des Ardennes</i>, and <i xml:lang="fr">Commère Il faut chauffer le lit</i>. These scherzi, however, brought him more note than profit, and soon afterwards he returned to Martinique.</p>
			<p>During his second term of service Cazotte wrote his heroic-comic poem, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem" xml:lang="fr">Roman d’Olivier</i>, in twelve cantos, afterwards printed in Paris (2 <abbr>vols.</abbr> 8vo, <time>1765</time>); and it was held a novel and singular composition. When the English first attacked (in <time>1759</time>) Saint Pierre of Martinique, afterwards captured by Rodney in <time>1762</time>, the sprightly littérateur showed abundant courage and conduct, but overexertion injured his health, and he was again driven from his post by sickness. He learned, on landing in France, that his brother, whilome Vicar-General to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Choiseul, Bishop of Châlons-sur-Marne, had died and left him a fair estate, Pierry, near Epernay; he therefore resigned his appointment and retired with the title “Commissary-General to the Marine.” But presently he lost 50,000 écus⁠—the whole fruit of his economies⁠—by the speculations of Père Lavalette to whose hands he had entrusted his estates, negroes, and effects at Martinique. These had been sold and the cheques had been forwarded to the owner: the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">S.J.</abbr>, however, refused to honour them. Hence the scandal of a lawsuit in which Cazotte showed much delicacy and regard for the feelings of his former tutors.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile Cazotte had married Elizabeth Roignon, daughter to the Chief Justice of Martinique; he returned to the Parisian world with some éclat and he became an universal favourite on account of his happy wit and humour, his bonhomie, his perfect frankness, and his hearty amiability. The vogue of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Olivier</i> induced him to follow it up with <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem" xml:lang="fr">Le Diable Amoureux</i>, a continuation or rather parody of Voltaire’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem" xml:lang="fr">Guerre civile de Genève</i>: this work was so skilfully carried out that it completely deceived the world; and it was followed by sundry minor pieces which were greedily read. Unlike the esprits forts of his age, he became after a gay youthtide an ardent Christian; he made the Gospel his rule of life; and he sturdily defended his religious opinions; he had also the moral courage to enter the lists with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Voltaire, then the idol-in-chief of the classes and the masses.</p>
			<p>In later life Cazotte met <span epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dom</span> Chavis, who was translating into a curious jargon (Arabo-Franco-Italian) certain Oriental tales; and, although he was nearing the Psalmist’s age-term of man, he agreed to “collaborate.” The Frenchman used to take the pen at midnight when returning from “social pleasures,” and work till 4⁠–⁠5 <abbr class="eoc">a.m.</abbr> As he had prodigious facility and spontaneity he finished his part of the task in two winters. Some of the tales in the suite, especially that of “Maugraby,” are attributed wholly to his invention; and, as a rule, his aim and object were to diffuse his spiritual ideas and to write treatises on moral perfection under the form of <i xml:lang="la">novelle</i>.</p>
			<p>Cazotte, after a well-spent and honourable life, had reason to expect with calmness “the evening and ending of a fine day.” But this was not to be, the Great Revolution had burst like a hurricane over the land, and he was doomed to die a hero’s death. His character was too candid, and his disposition too honest, for times which suggested concealment. He had become one of the Illuminati, and La Harpe ascribed to him the celebrated prophecy which described the minutest events of the Great Revolution. A Royalist pur sang, he freely expressed his sentiments to his old friend Ponteau, then Secretary of the Civil List. His letters came to light shortly after the terrible day, <time datetime="1792-08-10">August 10, 1792</time>: he was summarily arrested at Pierry and brought to Paris, where he was thrown into prison. On <time datetime="1792-09-03"><abbr>Sept.</abbr> 3</time>, when violence again waxed rampant, he was attacked by the patriot-assassins, and was saved only by the devotion of his daughter Elizabeth, who threw herself upon the old man crying, “You shall not reach my father’s heart before piercing mine.” The courage of the noble pair commanded the admiration of the ruffians, and they were carried home in triumph.</p>
			<p>For a few weeks the family remained unmolested, but in those days “Providence” slept and Fortune did not favour the brave. The Municipality presently decreed a second arrest, and the venerable littérateur, aged seventy-two, was sent before the revolutionary tribunal appointed to deal with the pretended offences of <time datetime="1792-08-10">August 10</time>. He was subjected to an interrogatory of thirty-six hours, during which his serenity and presence of mind never abandoned him and impressed even his accusers. But he was condemned to die for the all-sufficient reason:⁠—“It is not enough to be a good son, a good husband, a good father, one must also prove oneself a good citizen.” He spent his last hours with his confessor, wrote to his wife and children, praying his family not to beweep him, not to forget him, and never to offend against their God; and this missive, with a lock of his hair for his beloved daughter, he finally entrusted to the ghostly father. Upon the scaffold he turned to the crowd and cried, “I die as I have lived, truthful and faithful to my God and my King.” His venerable head, crowned with the white honours of age, fell on <time datetime="1792-09-25"><abbr>Sept.</abbr> 25, 1792</time>.</p>
			<p>Cazotte printed many works, some of great length, as the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Œuvres Morales</i>, which filled 7 vols, 8vo. in the complete edition of <time>1817</time>; and the biographers give a long list of publications, besides those above-mentioned, romantic, ethical, and spiritual, in verse and in prose. But he wrote mainly for his own pleasure, he never sought fame, and consequently his reputation never equalled his merit. His name, however, still smells sweet, passing sweet, amid the corruption and the frantic fury of his day and the memory of the witty, genial, and virtuous littérateur still blossoms in the dust.</p>
			<p>During my visit to Paris in early <time>1887</time>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Hermann Zotenberg was kind enough to show me the <abbr>MS.</abbr>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 1723, containing the original tales of the “New Arabian Nights.” As my health did not allow me sufficient length of stay to complete my translation, Professor Houdas (for whom, see Appendix, <abbr>p.</abbr> 10, <abbr>Suppl.</abbr> <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>) kindly consented to copy the excerpts required, and to explain the words and phrases which a deficiency of dictionaries and vocabularies at an outlandish port-town rendered unintelligible to me.</p>
			<p>In translating a <abbr>MS.</abbr>, which has never been collated or corrected and which abounds in errors of omission and commission, I have been guided by one consideration only, which is, that my first and chiefest duty to the reader is to make my book readable at the same time that it lays before him the whole matter which the text offered or ought to have offered. Hence I have not hesitated when necessary to change the order of the sentences, to delete tautological words and phrases, to suppress descriptions which are needlessly reiterated, and in places to supply the connecting links without which the chain of narrative is weakened or broken. These are liberties which must be allowed, unless the translator’s object be to produce a mutilated version of a mutilation.</p>
			<p>Here also I must express my cordial gratitude to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Alexander <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Cotheal, Consul-General for Nicaragua, in New York. This distinguished Arabist not only sent to me across the seas his <abbr>MS.</abbr> containing, inter alia, “The Tale of Attaf,” he also undertook to translate it for my collection upon my distinct assurance that its many novelties of treatment deserved an especial version. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. F.</abbr> Kirby has again conferred upon my readers an important service by his storiological notes. Lastly, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Steingass has lent me, as before, his valuable aid in concluding as he did in commencing this series, and on putting the colophon to</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>
					<span>The Sixteenth Volume</span>
					<br/>
					<span>of</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Thousand Nights and a Night.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:signature">Richard <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Burton.</p>
				<p><b>United Service Club</b>, <time datetime="1888-08-01">August 1st, 1888</time>.</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
