<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Translator’s Foreword</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter">
		<section data-parent="volume-15" id="foreword-15" epub:type="foreword">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Translator’s Foreword</h2>
			<p>This volume contains the last of my versions from the Wortley Montague Codex, and this is the place to offer a short account of that much bewritten <abbr class="eoc">MS.</abbr></p>
			<p>In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annals of the Bodleian Library</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, by the Reverend William Dunn Macray, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.A.</abbr> (London, Oxford and Cambridge, <time>1868</time>: 8vo. <abbr>p.</abbr> 206), we find the following official notice:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote>
				<header>
					<p>“<time datetime="1803"><abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 1803</time>.”</p>
				</header>
				<p>“An Arabic <abbr>MS.</abbr> in seven volumes, written in <time>1764</time>⁠–⁠<time datetime="1765">5</time>, and containing what is rarely met with, a complete collection of the Thousand and one Tales (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">N.B.</abbr> an error for “Nights”) of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Arabian Nights Entertainments</i>, was bought from Captain Jonathan Scott for £50. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Scott published, in <time>1811</time>, an edition of the Tales in six volumes (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">N.B.</abbr> He reprinted the wretched English version of <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Galland’s admirable French, and his “revisions” and “occasional corrections” are purely imaginative,) in which this <abbr>MS.</abbr> is described, (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">N.B.</abbr> after the <i xml:lang="la">mos majorum</i>). He obtained it from <abbr>Dr.</abbr> (Joseph) White, the Professor of Hebrew and Arabic at Oxford, who had bought it at the sale of the library of Edward Wortley Montague, by whom it had been brought from the East. (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">N.B.</abbr> <abbr>Dr.</abbr> White at one time intended to translate it literally, and thereby eclipse the Anglo-French version.) It is noticed in Ouseley’s Oriental Collections (Cadell and Davies), <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 25.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The Jonathan Scott above alluded to appears under various titles as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Scott, Captain Scott and Doctor Scott. He was an officer in the Bengal Army about the end of the last century, and was made Persian Secretary by “Warren Hastings, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>,” to whom he dedicated his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tales, Anecdotes and Letters, translated from the Arabic and Persian</i> (Cadell and Davies, London, <time>1800</time>), and he englished the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fa-Latn">Bahár-i-Dánish</i> (<abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> <time>1799</time>) and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Firishtah’s History of the Dakkhan (Deccan) and of the reigns of the later Emperors of Hindostan</i>. He became <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Scott because made an <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">LL.D.</abbr> at Oxford as meet for a “Professor (of Oriental languages) at the Royal Military and East India Colleges”; and finally he settled at Netley, in Shropshire, where he died.</p>
			<p>It is not the fault of English Orientalists if the <abbr>MS.</abbr> in question is not thoroughly well-known to the world of letters. In <time>1797</time> Sir Gore Ouseley’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Oriental Collections</i> (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 25⁠–⁠33) describes it, evidently with the aid of Scott, who is the authority for stating that the tales generally appear like pearls strung at random on the same thread; adding, “if they are truly Oriental it is a matter of little importance to us Europeans whether they are strung on this night or that night.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7101" id="noteref-7101" epub:type="noteref">7101</a> This first and somewhat imperfect catalogue of the contents was followed in <time>1811</time> by a second, which concludes the six-volume edition of “The</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>
					<span>Arabian Nights</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Entertainments,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Carefully revised, and occasionally corrected</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the Arabic.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To which is added</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A selection of new tales,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now first translated</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the Arabic Originals.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Also,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An Introduction and Notes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Illustrative of the</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Religion, Manners and Customs of the Muhammadans.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The sixth volume, whose second title is “Tales | selected from the Manuscript copy | of the | 1001 Nights | brought to Europe by Edward Wortley Montague, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>,” ends with a general Appendix, of which ten pages are devoted to a description of the Codex and a Catalogue of its contents. Scott’s sixth volume, like the rest of his version, is now becoming rare, and it is regretable that when Messieurs Nimmo and Bain reprinted, in <time>1882</time>, the bulk of the work (4 <abbr>vols.</abbr> 8vo) they stopped short at volume five.</p>
			<p>Lastly we find a third list dating from <time>1835</time> in the “<span xml:lang="la">Catalogi | Codicum Manuscriptorum Orientalium | Bibliothecæ Bodleianæ | Pars Secunda | Arabicos | complectens. | Confecit | Alexander Nicoll, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">J.C.D.</abbr> | Nuper Linguæ <abbr>Heb.</abbr> Professor Regius, necnon Ædis Christi <abbr>Canonicus.</abbr> | Editionem absolvit | et Catalogum urianum<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7102" id="noteref-7102" epub:type="noteref">7102</a> aliquatenus emendavit | <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. B.</abbr> Pusey, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">S.T.B.</abbr> | Viri desideratissimi Successor. | Oxonii, | E Typographio Academico | <time datetime="1835" epub:type="z3998:roman">MDCCCXXXV</time></span>” This is introduced under the head, “<span xml:lang="la">Codicis Arabici Muhammadani Narrationes Fictæ sive Historiæ Romanenses | in Quarto</span>” (<abbr>pp.</abbr> 145⁠–⁠150).</p>
			<p>I am not aware that any attempt has been made to trace the history of the Wortley Montague <abbr>MS.</abbr>; but its internal evidence supplies a modicum of information.</p>
			<p>By way of colophon to the seventh and last volume we have, “On this wise end to us the Stories of the Kings and histories of various folk as foregoing in the Thousand Nights and a Night, perfected and completed, on the eighteenth day of Safar the auspicious, which is of <time datetime="1764">the months of (the year <abbr epub:type="se:era">AH</abbr>) one thousand one hundred and seventy-eight” (= <abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 1764⁠–⁠65)</time>.</p>
			<p>“Copied by the humblest and neediest of the poor, Omar-al-Safatí, to whose sins may Allah be Ruthful!</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“An thou find in us fault deign default supply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hallow the Faultless and Glorify.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The term <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Suftah</i> is now and has been applied for the last century to the sons of Turkish fathers by Arab mothers, and many of these Mulattos live by the pen. On the flyleaf of <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> is written in a fine and flowing Persian (?) hand, strongly contrasting with the text of the tome, which is unusually careless and bad, “This Book | The Thousand Nights and a Night of the Acts and deeds (<i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Sírat</i>) of the Kings | and what befell them from sundry | women that were whorish | and witty | and various | Tales | therein.” Below it also is a Persian couplet written in vulgar Iranian characters of the half-Shikastah type:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote class="couplets" epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span xml:lang="fa-Latn">
						<span>Chih goyam, o chih poyam?</span>
						<span>✿ Na mí-dánam hích o púch.</span>
					</span>
					<br/>
					<span>
						<span>(What shall I say or whither fly?</span>
						<span>✿ This stuff and this nonsense know not I.)</span>
					</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Moreover, at the beginning of <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> is a list of fifteen tales written in Europeo-Arabic characters, after schoolboy fashion, and probably by Scott. In <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> there is no initial list, but by way of Foreword we read, “This is volume the second of the Thousand Nights and a Night from the <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XCIII</span> Night, full and complete.” And the Colophon declares, “And this is what hath been finished for us of the fourth (probably a clerical error for “second”) tome of the Thousand Nights and a Night to the <span epub:type="z3998:roman">CLXXVII</span> Night, written on the <time datetime="1764-02-23">twentieth day of the month Sha’bán <abbr epub:type="se:era">AH</abbr>, one thousand one hundred and seventy-seven” (= <abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 1764)</time>. This date shows that the <abbr>MS.</abbr> was finished during the year after incept.</p>
			<p>The text from which our <abbr>MS.</abbr> was copied must have been valuable, and we have reason to regret that so many passages both of poetry and prose are almost hopelessly corrupt. Its tone and tenor are distinctly Nilotic; and, as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Wortley Montague lived for some time in Egypt, he may have bought it at the Capital of the Nile-land. The story of the Syrian (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 468) and that of the Two Lack-tacts (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> 262), notably exalt Misr and Cairo at the expense of Shám and Damascus; and there are many other instances of preferring Kemi the Black Soil to the so-called “Holy Land.” The general tone, as well as the special incidents of the book, argues that the stories may have been ancient, but they certainly have been modernised. Coffee is commonly used (passim) although tobacco is still unknown; a youth learns archery and gunnery (Zarb al-Risás, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> 440); casting of cannon occurs (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 186), and in one place (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> 134) we read of <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Tabanjatayn</i>, a pair of pistols; the word, which is still popular, being a corruption of the Persian <i xml:lang="fa-Latn">Tabáncheh</i> = a slap or blow, even as the French call a derringer <i xml:lang="fr">coup de poing</i>. The characteristic of this Recueil is its want of finish. The stories are told after perfunctory fashion as though the writer had not taken the trouble to work out the details. There are no names or titles to the tales, so that every translator must give his own; and the endings are equally unsatisfactory, they usually content themselves, after “native” fashion, with <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Intihá</i> = finis; and the connection with the thread of the work must be supplied by the storyteller or the translator. Headlines were not in use for the <abbr>MSS.</abbr> of that day, and the catchwords are often irregular, a new word taking the place of the initial in the following page.</p>
			<p>The handwriting, save and except in the first volume, has the merit of regularity, and appears the same throughout the succeeding six, except in the rare places (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> 92⁠–⁠93), where the lazy copyist did not care to change a worn-out pen, and continued to write with a double nib. On the other hand, it is the character of a village-schoolmaster whose literary culture is at its lowest. Hardly a sheet appears without some blunder which only in rare places is erased or corrected, and a few lacunæ are supplied by several hands, Oriental and European, the latter presumably Scott’s. Not unfrequently the terminal word of a line is divided, a sign of great incuria or ignorance, as <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Sháhr | baz</i> (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 4), <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Shahr | zád</i> (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 309, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> 106), and <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Fawa | jadtu-h</i> = so I found him (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 104). Koranic quotations almost always lack vowel-points, and are introduced without the usual ceremony. Poetry also, that crux of a skilful scribe, is carelessly treated, and often enough two sets of verse are thrown into one, the first rhyming in <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">úr</i>, and the second in <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">ír</i> (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 256). The rhyme-words also are repeated within unlawful limits (passim and <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 308, <abbr>ll.</abbr> 6 and 11). Verse is thrust into the body of the page (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> 112) without signs of citation in red ink or other (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> 406); and rarely we find it, as it should be, in distichs divided by the normal conventional marks, asterisks and similar separations. Sometimes it appears in a column of hemistichs after the fashion of Europe (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> 111; <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> 232, <abbr>etc.</abbr>): here (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 226) a quotation is huddled into a single line; there (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 242) four lines, written as monostichs, are followed by two distichs in as many lines.</p>
			<p>As regards the metrical part <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Steingass writes to me, “The verses in al-Hayfá and Yúsuf, where not mere doggerel, are spoiled by the spelling. I was rarely able to make out even the metre and I think you have accomplished a feat by translating them as you have done.”</p>
			<p>The language of the <abbr>MS.</abbr> is generally that of the Felláh and notably so in sundry of the tales, such as, “<span epub:type="se:name.publication.short-story">The Goodwife of Cairo and her four Gallants</span>” (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 444). Of this a few verbal and phrasal instances will suffice. <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Adíní</i> = here am I (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 198); <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Ahná</i> (passim, for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">nahnu</i>) <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">nakháf</i> = we fear; <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">’Alaykí</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">’alaykĭ</i>) = on thee; and generally the long vowel (<i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="ar-Latn">-kí</i>) for the short (<i epub:type="z3998:phoneme" xml:lang="ar-Latn">-ki</i>) in the pronoun of the second person feminine; <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Antah</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">anta</i>) = thou (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> 96) and <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Antú</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">antum</i>) = you (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> 351); <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Aráha</i> and even <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">arúha</i>, <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">rúhat</i> and <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">rúha</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">ráha</i>) = he went (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> 74 and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> 75) and <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Arúhú</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">rúhú</i>) = go ye (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> 179); <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Bakarah</i> * * * <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">allazi</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">allatí</i>) = a cow (he) who, <abbr>etc.</abbr>; (see in this <abbr>vol.</abbr>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 253) and generally a fine and utter contempt for genders, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Hum</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">hunna</i>) <abbr>masc.</abbr> for <abbr>fem.</abbr> (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> 91; <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> 146; and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 233); <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Tá’áli</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">ta’ál</i>) <abbr>fem.</abbr> for <abbr>masc.</abbr> (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> 96 et passim); <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Bíhím</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">bi-him</i>) = with them (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 367); <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Bi-kám</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">bi-kum</i>) = with you (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> 142) are fair specimens of long broad vowels supplanting the short, a peculiarity known in classical <abbr>Arab.</abbr>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Miftáh</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Miftah</i>) = a key. Here, however, it is exaggerated, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Bá’íd</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">ba’íd</i>) = far (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> 167); <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Kám</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">kam</i>) = how many? <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Kúm</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">kum</i>) = you (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 118); <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Kúl-há</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">kul-há</i>) = tell it (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> 58); <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Mín</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">man</i>) = who? (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> 89); <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Mirwád</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Mirwad</i>) = a branding iron; <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Natanáshshad</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">natanashshad</i>) = we seek tidings (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 211); <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Rájal</i> (<abbr>pron.</abbr> <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Rágil</i>, for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Rajul</i>) = a man (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> 118 and passim); <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Sáhal</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">sahal</i>) = easy, facile (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> 71); <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Sír</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">sir</i>) = go, be off! (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 199); <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Shíl</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">shil</i>) = carry away (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 111); and <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Záhab</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">zahab</i>) = gold (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 186). This broad Doric or Caledonian articulation is not musical to unaccustomed organs. As in popular parlance the <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Dál</i> supplants the <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Zál</i>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Dahaba</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">zahaba</i>) = he went (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 277 and passim); also <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">T</i> takes the place of <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">Th</i>, as <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Tult</i> for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">thulth</i> = one third (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> 348) and <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Tamrat</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">thamrat</i>) = fruit (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 260), thus generally ignoring the sibilant <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">Th</i> after the fashion of the modern Egyptians who say <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Tumm</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">thumma</i>) = again; “<i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Kattir</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">kaththir</i>) <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Khayrak”</i> = God increase thy weal, and <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Lattama</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">laththama</i>) = he veiled. Also a general ignoring of the dual, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Házá ’usfurayn</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">’Usfuráni</i>) = these be birds (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> 121); <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Nazalú al-Wazirayn</i> (do) = the two Wazirs went down (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> 123); and lastly <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Al-Wuzará al-itnayn</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Al-Wazíráni</i>) = the two Wazirs (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> 121). Again a fine contempt for numbers, as <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Nanzur ana</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Anzur</i>) = I (we) see (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 198) and <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Inní</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">inná</i>) <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">narúhu</i> = indeed I (we) go (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> 190). Also an equally conscientious disregard for cases, as <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Min mál abú-há</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">abí-há</i>) = out of the moneys of her sire (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> 190); and this is apparently the rule of the writer.</p>
			<p>Of Egyptianisms and vulgarisms we have <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">Ant</i>, <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">má ghibtshayy</i> = thou, hast thou not been absent at all? with the <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">shayy</i> (a thing) subjoined to the verb in this and similar other phrases; <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">Baksísh</i> for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Bakhshish</i> (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> 356); <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">Al-Jawáz</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">al-zíwáj</i>) = marriage (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 14); <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">Fakí</i> or <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">Fikí</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">fakih</i>) = a divine (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> 207 and passim); <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">Finjál</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">finján</i>) = a coffee-cup (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 424, also a Najdí or Central Arabian corruption); <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">Kuwayyis</i> = nice, pretty (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> 179); <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">Láyálí</i> (<span xml:lang="ar">لايالى</span> for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">liallá</i> <span xml:lang="ar">لئلا</span>) = lest that (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 285); <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">Luhúmát</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">luhúm</i>) = meats, a mere barbarism (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 247); <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">Matah</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Matá</i>) = when? (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 464); <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">Ma’áyah</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">ma’í</i>) = with me (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> 13 et passim); <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">Shuwayy</i> (or <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">shuwayyah</i>) <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">Mayah</i>, a double diminutive (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Muwayy</i> or <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Muwayh</i>) = a small little water, intensely Nilotic (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> 44); <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">Mbarih</i> or <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">Embárah</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Al-bárihah</i>) = yesterday (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 449); <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">Takkat</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Dakkat</i>) = she rapped (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> 190); <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">Úzbáshá</i> and <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">Uzbáshá</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Yúzbáshí</i>) = a centurion, a captain (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 430 et passim); <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">Záídjah</i> for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Záijah</i> (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> 329); <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">Zarághít</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Zaghárít</i>) = lullilooing (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> 12); <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">Zínah</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Ziná</i>) = adultery, and lastly <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">Zúda</i> (for <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Záda</i>) = increased (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> 87). Here the reader will cry <i xml:lang="la">jam satis</i>; while the student will compare the list with that given in my Terminal Essay (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span> 168⁠–⁠9).</p>
			<p>The two Appendices require no explanation. <abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> is a Catalogue of the Tales in the Wortley Montague <abbr>MS.</abbr>, and <i xml:lang="ar-EG-Latn">No.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> contains Notes upon the Storiology of the Supplemental Volumes <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> by the practised pen of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. F.</abbr> Kirby. The sheets during my absence from England have been passed through the press and sundry additions and corrections have been made by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Steingass.</p>
			<p>In conclusion I would state that my hope was to see this Volume (<abbr>No.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>) terminate my long task; but circumstance is stronger than my will and I must ask leave to bring out one more⁠—The New Arabian Nights.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:signature">Richard <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Burton.</p>
				<p><b>Athenæum Club</b>, <time datetime="1888-09-01">September 1st, 1888</time>.</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
