<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Translator’s Foreword</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter">
		<section data-parent="volume-1" id="foreword-1" epub:type="foreword">
			<h3 epub:type="title">The Translator’s Foreword</h3>
			<p>This work, laborious as it may appear, has been to me a labour of love, an unfailing source of solace and satisfaction. During my long years of official banishment to the luxuriant and deadly deserts of Western Africa, and to the dull and dreary half-clearings of South America, it proved itself a charm, a talisman against ennui and despondency. Impossible even to open the pages without a vision starting into view; without drawing a picture from the pinacothek of the brain; without reviving a host of memories and reminiscences which are not the common property of travellers, however widely they may have travelled. From my dull and commonplace and “respectable” surroundings, the Jinn bore me at once to the land of my predilection, Arabia, a region so familiar to my mind that even at first sight, it seemed a reminiscence of some bygone metempsychic life in the distant Past. Again I stood under the diaphanous skies, in air glorious as æther, whose every breath raises men’s spirits like sparkling wine. Once more I saw the evening star hanging like a solitaire from the pure front of the western firmament; and the afterglow transfiguring and transforming, as by magic, the homely and rugged features of the scene into a fairyland lit with a light which never shines on other soils or seas. Then would appear the woollen tents, low and black, of the true Badawin, mere dots in the boundless waste of lion-tawny clays and gazelle-brown gravels, and the campfire dotting like a glowworm the village centre. Presently, sweetened by distance, would be heard the wild weird song of lads and lasses, driving or rather pelting, through the gloaming their sheep and goats; and the measured chant of the spearsmen gravely stalking behind their charge, the camels; mingled with the bleating of the flocks and the bellowing of the humpy herds; while the rere-mouse flitted overhead with his tiny shriek, and the rave of the jackal resounded through deepening glooms, and⁠—most musical of music⁠—the palm-trees answered the whispers of the night-breeze with the softest tones of falling water.</p>
			<p>And then a shift of scene. The Shaykhs and “white-beards” of the tribe gravely take their places, sitting with outspread skirts like hillocks on the plain, as the Arabs say, around the campfire, whilst I reward their hospitality and secure its continuance by reading or reciting a few pages of their favourite tales. The women and children stand motionless as silhouettes outside the ring; and all are breathless with attention; they seem to drink in the words with eyes and mouths as well as with ears. The most fantastic flights of fancy, the wildest improbabilities, the most impossible of impossibilities, appear to them utterly natural, mere matters of everyday occurrence. They enter thoroughly into each phase of feeling touched upon by the author: they take a personal pride in the chivalrous nature and knightly prowess of Taj al-Mulúk; they are touched with tenderness by the self-sacrificing love of Azízah; their mouths water as they hear of heaps of untold gold given away in largesse like clay; they chuckle with delight every time a Kázi or a Fakír⁠—a judge or a reverend⁠—is scurvily entreated by some Pantagruelist of the Wilderness; and, despite their normal solemnity and impassibility, all roar with laughter, sometimes rolling upon the ground till the reader’s gravity is sorely tried, at the tales of the garrulous Barber and of Ali and the Kurdish Sharper. To this magnetising mood the sole exception is when a Badawi of superior accomplishments, who sometimes says his prayers, ejaculates a startling “Astaghfaru’llah”⁠—I pray Allah’s pardon!⁠—for listening, not to Carlyle’s “downright lies,” but to light mention of the sex whose name is never heard amongst the nobility of the Desert.</p>
			<p>Nor was it only in Arabia that the immortal Nights did me such notable service: I found the wildlings of Somali-land equally amenable to its discipline; no one was deaf to the charm and the two women-cooks of my caravan, on its way to Harar, were incontinently dubbed by my men “Shahrazad” and “Dinazad.”</p>
			<p>It may be permitted me also to note that this translation is a natural outcome of my Pilgrimage to al-Medinah and Meccah. Arriving at Aden in the (so-called) winter of 1852, I put up with my old and dear friend, Steinhaeuser, to whose memory this volume is inscribed; and, when talking over Arabia and the Arabs, we at once came to the same conclusion that, while the name of this wondrous treasury of Muslim folklore is familiar to almost every English child, no general reader is aware of the valuables it contains, nor indeed will the door open to any but Arabists. Before parting we agreed to “collaborate” and produce a full, complete, unvarnished, uncastrated copy of the great original, my friend taking the prose and I the metrical part; and we corresponded upon the subject for years. But whilst I was in the Brazil, Steinhaeuser died suddenly of apoplexy at Berne in Switzerland and, after the fashion of Anglo-India, his valuable <abbr>MSS.</abbr> left at Aden were dispersed, and very little of his labours came into my hands.</p>
			<p>Thus I was left alone to my work, which progressed fitfully amid a host of obstructions. At length, in the spring of <time>1879</time>, the tedious process of copying began and the book commenced to take finished form. But, during the winter of <time>1881</time>⁠–⁠<time datetime="1882">82</time>, I saw in the literary journals a notice of a new version by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Payne, well known to scholars for his prowess in English verse, especially for his translation of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Poems of Master Francis Villon, of Paris</i>. Being then engaged on an expedition to the Gold Coast (for gold), which seemed likely to cover some months, I wrote to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Athenaeum</i> (<time datetime="1881-11-13"><abbr>Nov.</abbr> 13, 1881</time>) and to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Payne, who was wholly unconscious that we were engaged on the same work, and freely offered him precedence and possession of the field till no longer wanted. He accepted my offer as frankly, and his priority entailed another delay lasting till the spring of <time>1885</time>. These details will partly account for the lateness of my appearing, but there is yet another cause. Professional ambition suggested that literary labours, unpopular with the vulgar and the half-educated, are not likely to help a man up the ladder of promotion. But common sense presently suggested to me that, professionally speaking, I was not a success; and, at the same time, that I had no cause to be ashamed of my failure. In our day, when we live under a despotism of the lower “middle-class” Philister who can pardon anything but superiority, the prizes of competitive services are monopolised by certain “pets” of the <i xml:lang="fr">Médiocratie</i>, and prime favourites of that jealous and potent majority⁠—the Mediocrities who know “no nonsense about merit.” It is hard for an outsider to realise how perfect is the monopoly of commonplace, and to comprehend how fatal a stumbling-stone that man sets in the way of his own advancement who dares to think for himself, or who knows more or who does more than the mob of gentlemen-employees who know very little and who do even less.</p>
			<p>Yet, however behindhand I may be, there is still ample room and verge for an English version of the “Arabian Nights’ Entertainments.”</p>
			<p>Our century of translations, popular and vernacular, from (Professor Antoine) Galland’s delightful abbreviation and adaptation (<abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 1704), in no wise represent the eastern original. The best and latest, the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Foster’s, which is diffuse and verbose, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Moir Bussey’s, which is a re-correction, abound in gallicisms of style and idiom; and one and all degrade a chef-d’œuvre of the highest anthropological and ethnographical interest and importance to a mere fairy-book, a nice present for little boys.</p>
			<p>After nearly a century had elapsed, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Jonathan Scott (<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">LL.D.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">H.E.I.C.</abbr>’s <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">S.</abbr>, Persian Secretary to the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">G.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">G.</abbr> Bengal; Oriental Professor, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>), printed his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tales, Anecdotes, and Letters, translated from the Arabic and Persian</i>, (Cadell and Davies, London, <abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> <time>1800</time>); and followed in <time>1811</time> with an edition of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Arabian Nights’ Entertainments</i> from the <abbr>MS.</abbr> of Edward Wortley Montague (in 6 <abbr>vols.</abbr>, small 8vo, London: Longmans, <abbr>etc.</abbr>). This work he (and he only) describes as “Carefully revised and occasionally corrected from the Arabic.” The reading public did not wholly reject it, sundry texts were founded upon the Scott version and it has been imperfectly reprinted (4 <abbr>vols.</abbr>, 8vo, Nimmo and Bain, London, <time>1883</time>). But most men, little recking what a small portion of the original they were reading, satisfied themselves with the Anglo-French epitome and metaphrase. At length in <time>1838</time>, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Henry Torrens, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">B.A.</abbr>, Irishman, lawyer (“of the Inner Temple”) and Bengal Civilian, took a step in the right direction; and began to translate, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Book of the Thousand Nights and One Night</i>, (1 <abbr>vol.</abbr>, 8vo, Calcutta: <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Thacker and <abbr>Co.</abbr>) from the Arabic of the Ægyptian (!) <abbr>MS.</abbr> edited by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> (afterwards Sir) William <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Macnaghten. The attempt, or rather the intention, was highly creditable; the copy was carefully moulded upon the model and offered the best example of the <i xml:lang="la">verbatim et literatim</i> style. But the plucky author knew little of Arabic, and least of what is most wanted, the dialect of Egypt and Syria. His prose is so conscientious as to offer up spirit at the shrine of letter; and his verse, always whimsical, has at times a manner of Hibernian whoop which is comical when it should be pathetic. Lastly he printed only one volume of a series which completed would have contained nine or ten.</p>
			<p>That amiable and devoted Arabist, the late Edward William Lane does not score a success in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">New Translation of the Tales of a Thousand and One Nights</i> (London: Charles Knight and <abbr>Co.</abbr>, <time datetime="1839" epub:type="z3998:roman">MDCCCXXXIX</time>) of which there have been four English editions, besides American, two edited by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. S.</abbr> Poole. He chose the abbreviating Bulak Edition; and, of its two hundred tales, he has omitted about half and by far the more characteristic half: the work was intended for “the drawing-room table;” and, consequently, the workman was compelled to avoid the “objectionable” and aught “approaching to licentiousness.” He converts the Arabian Nights into the Arabian Chapters, arbitrarily changing the division and, worse still, he converts some chapters into notes. He renders poetry by prose and apologises for not omitting it altogether: he neglects assonance and he is at once too Oriental and not Oriental enough. He had small store of Arabic at the time⁠—Lane of the Nights is not Lane of the Dictionary⁠—and his pages are disfigured by many childish mistakes. Worst of all, the three handsome volumes are rendered unreadable as Sale’s Koran by their anglicised Latin, their sesquipedalian un-English words, and the stiff and stilted style of half a century ago when our prose was, perhaps, the worst in Europe. Their cargo of Muslim learning was most valuable to the student, but utterly out of place for readers of The Nights; republished, as these notes have been separately (London, Chatto, <time>1883</time>), they are an ethnological textbook.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Payne has printed, for the Villon Society and for private circulation only, the first and sole complete translation of the great compendium, “comprising about four times as much matter as that of Galland, and three times as much as that of any other translator;” and I cannot but feel proud that he has honoured me with the dedication of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Book of The Thousand Nights and One Night</i>. His version is most readable: his English, with a sub-flavour of the Mabinogionic archaicism, is admirable; and his style gives life and light to the nine volumes whose matter is frequently heavy enough. He succeeds admirably in the most difficult passages and he often hits upon choice and special terms and the exact vernacular equivalent of the foreign word, so happily and so picturesquely that all future translators must perforce use the same expression under pain of falling far short. But the learned and versatile author bound himself to issue only five hundred copies, and “not to reproduce the work in its complete and uncastrated form.” Consequently his excellent version is <i xml:lang="it">caviaire</i> to the general⁠—practically unprocurable.</p>
			<p>And here I hasten to confess that ample use has been made of the three versions above noted, the whole being blended by a <i xml:lang="la">callida junctura</i> into a homogeneous mass. But in the presence of so many predecessors a writer is bound to show some <i xml:lang="fr">raison d’être</i> for making a fresh attempt and this I proceed to do with due reserve.</p>
			<p>Briefly, the object of this version is to show what “The Thousand Nights and a Night” really is. Not, however, for reasons to be more fully stated in the terminal Essay, by straining <i xml:lang="la">verbum reddere verbo</i>, but by writing as the Arab would have written in English. On this point I am all with Saint Jerome (<abbr>Pref.</abbr> in Jobum) “<i xml:lang="la">Vel verbum e verbo, vel sensum e sensu, vel ex utroque commixtum, et medie temperatum genus translationis.</i>” My work claims to be a faithful copy of the great Eastern Saga-book, by preserving intact, not only the spirit, but even the <i xml:lang="fr">mécanique</i>, the manner and the matter. Hence, however prosy and long-drawn out be the formula, it retains the scheme of the Nights because they are a prime feature in the original. The Ráwí or reciter, to whose wits the task of supplying details is left, well knows their value: the openings carefully repeat the names of the <i xml:lang="la">dramatis personæ</i> and thus fix them in the hearer’s memory. Without the Nights no Arabian Nights! Moreover it is necessary to retain the whole apparatus: nothing more ill-advised than <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Jonathan Scott’s strange device of garnishing The Nights with fancy headpieces and tailpieces or the splitting-up of Galland’s narrative by merely prefixing “<i xml:lang="fr">Nuit</i>,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>, ending moreover, with the <span epub:type="z3998:roman">CCXXXIV</span> Night: yet this has been done, apparently with the consent of the great Arabist Sylvestre de Sacy (Paris, Ernest Bourdin). Moreover, holding that the translator’s glory is to add something to his native tongue, while avoiding the hideous hag-like nakedness of Torrens and the bald literalism of Lane, I have carefully Englished the picturesque turns and novel expressions of the original in all their outlandishness; for instance, when the dust-cloud raised by a tramping host is described as “walling the horizon.” Hence peculiar attention has been paid to the tropes and figures which the Arabic language often packs into a single term; and I have never hesitated to coin a word when wanted, such as “she snorted and snarked,” fully to represent the original. These, like many in Rabelais, are mere barbarisms unless generally adopted; in which case they become civilised and common currency.</p>
			<p id="foreword-1-1">Despite objections manifold and manifest, I have preserved the balance of sentences and the prose rhyme and rhythm which Easterns look upon as mere music. This <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Sajʼa</i>, or cadence of the cooing dove, has in Arabic its special duties. It adds a sparkle to description and a point to proverb, epigram and dialogue; it corresponds with our “artful alliteration” (which in places I have substituted for it) and, generally, it defines the boundaries between the classical and the popular styles which jostle each other in The Nights. If at times it appear strained and forced, after the wont of rhymed prose, the scholar will observe that, despite the immense copiousness of assonants and consonants in Arabic, the strain is often put upon it intentionally, like the <i xml:lang="oc">Rims cars</i> of Dante and the Troubadours. This rhymed prose may be “un-English” and unpleasant, even irritating to the British ear; still I look upon it as a sine quâ non for a complete reproduction of the original. In the terminal Essay I shall revert to the subject.</p>
			<p>On the other hand when treating the versicle portion, which may represent a total of ten thousand lines, I have not always bound myself by the metrical bonds of the Arabic, which are artificial in the extreme, and which in English can be made bearable only by a tour de force. I allude especially to the monorhyme, <i xml:lang="oc">Rim continuat</i> or <i xml:lang="oc">tirade monorime</i>, whose monotonous simplicity was preferred by the Troubadours for threnodies. It may serve well for three or four couplets but, when it extends, as in the Ghazal-canzon, to eighteen, and in the Kasidah, elegy or ode, to more, it must either satisfy itself with banal rhyme-words, when the assonants should as a rule be expressive and emphatic; or, it must display an ingenuity, a smell of the oil, which assuredly does not add to the reader’s pleasure. It can perhaps be done and it should be done; but for me the task has no attractions: I can fence better in shoes than in sabots. Finally I print the couplets in Arab form separating the hemistichs by asterisks.</p>
			<p>And now to consider one matter of special importance in the book⁠—its <i xml:lang="la">turpiloquium</i>. This stumbling-block is of two kinds, completely distinct. One is the simple, naive and childlike indecency which, from Tangiers to Japan, occurs throughout general conversation of high and low in the present day. It uses, like the holy books of the Hebrews, expressions “plainly descriptive of natural situations;” and it treats in an unconventionally free and naked manner of subjects and matters which are usually, by common consent, left undescribed. As Sir William Jones observed long ago, “that anything natural can be offensively obscene never seems to have occurred to the Indians or to their legislators; a singularity (?) pervading their writings and conversation, but no proof of moral depravity.” Another justly observes, <i xml:lang="fr">Les peuples primitifs n’y entendent pas malice: ils appellent les choses par leurs noms et ne trouvent pas condamnable ce qui est naturel</i>. And they are prying as children. For instance the European novelist marries off his hero and heroine and leaves them to consummate marriage in privacy; even Tom Jones has the decency to bolt the door. But the Eastern storyteller, especially this unknown “prose Shakespeare,” must usher you, with a flourish, into the bridal chamber and narrate to you, with infinite gusto, everything he sees and hears. Again we must remember that grossness and indecency, in fact <i xml:lang="fr">les turpitudes</i>, are matters of time and place; what is offensive in England is not so in Egypt; what scandalises us now would have been a tame joke <i xml:lang="la">tempore Elisæ</i>. Withal The Nights will not be found in this matter coarser than many passages of Shakespeare, Sterne, and Swift, and their uncleanness rarely attains the perfection of Alcofribas Nasier, “<i xml:lang="fr">divin maître et atroce cochon</i>.” The other element is absolute obscenity, sometimes, but not always, tempered by wit, humour and drollery; here we have an exaggeration of Petronius Arbiter, the handiwork of writers whose ancestry, the most religious and the most debauched of mankind, practised every abomination before the shrine of the Canopic Gods.</p>
			<p>In accordance with my purpose of reproducing the Nights, not <i xml:lang="la">virginibus puerisque</i>, but in as perfect a picture as my powers permit, I have carefully sought out the English equivalent of every Arabic word, however low it may be or “shocking” to ears polite; preserving, on the other hand, all possible delicacy where the indecency is not intentional; and, as a friend advises me to state, not exaggerating the vulgarities and the indecencies which, indeed, can hardly be exaggerated. For the coarseness and crassness are but the shades of a picture which would otherwise be all lights. The general tone of The Nights is exceptionally high and pure. The devotional fervour often rises to the boiling-point of fanaticism. The pathos is sweet, deep and genuine; tender, simple and true, utterly unlike much of our modern tinsel. Its life, strong, splendid and multitudinous, is everywhere flavoured with that unaffected pessimism and constitutional melancholy which strike deepest root under the brightest skies and which sigh in the face of heaven:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse" xml:lang="la">
				<p>
					<span>Vita quid est hominis? Viridis floriscula mortis;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Sole Oriente oriens, sole cadente cadens.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Poetical justice is administered by the literary Kází with exemplary impartiality and severity; “denouncing evil doers and eulogising deeds admirably achieved.” The morale is sound and healthy; and at times we descry, through the voluptuous and libertine picture, vistas of a transcendental morality, the morality of Socrates in Plato. Subtle corruption and covert licentiousness are utterly absent; we find more real “vice” in many a short French <i xml:lang="fr">roman</i>, say <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">La Dame aux Camelias</i>, and in not a few English novels of our day than in the thousands of pages of the <abbr class="eoc">Arab.</abbr> Here we have nothing of that most immodest modern modesty which sees covert implication where nothing is implied, and “improper” allusion, when propriety is not outraged; nor do we meet with the Nineteenth Century refinement; innocence of the word not of the thought; morality of the tongue not of the heart, and the sincere homage paid to virtue in guise of perfect hypocrisy. It is, indeed, this unique contrast of a quaint element, childish crudities and nursery indecencies and “vain and amatorious” phrase jostling the finest and highest views of life and character, shown in the kaleidoscopic shiftings of the marvellous picture with many a “rich truth in a tale’s pretence”; pointed by a rough dry humour which compares well with “wut;” the alternations of strength and weakness, of pathos and bathos, of the boldest poetry (the diction of Job) and the baldest prose (the Egyptian of today); the contact of religion and morality with the orgies of African Apuleius and Petronius Arbiter⁠—at times taking away the reader’s breath⁠—and, finally, the whole dominated everywhere by that marvellous Oriental fancy, wherein the spiritual and the supernatural are as common as the material and the natural; it is this contrast, I say, which forms the chiefest charm of The Nights, which gives it the most striking originality and which makes it a perfect expositor of the medieval Muslim mind.</p>
			<p>Explanatory notes did not enter into <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Payne’s plan. They do with mine: I can hardly imagine The Nights being read to any profit by men of the West without commentary. My annotations avoid only one subject, parallels of European folklore and fabliaux which, however interesting, would overswell the bulk of a book whose speciality is anthropology. The accidents of my life, it may be said without undue presumption, my long dealings with Arabs and other Muhammadans, and my familiarity not only with their idiom but with their turn of thought, and with that racial individuality which baffles description, have given me certain advantages over the average student, however deeply he may have studied. These volumes, moreover, afford me a long-sought opportunity of noticing practices and customs which interest all mankind and which “Society” will not hear mentioned. Grote, the historian, and Thackeray, the novelist, both lamented that the <i xml:lang="fr">bégueulerie</i> of their countrymen condemned them to keep silence where publicity was required; and that they could not even claim the partial licence of a Fielding and a Smollett. Hence a score of years ago I lent my best help to the late <abbr>Dr.</abbr> James Hunt in founding the Anthropological Society, whose presidential chair I first occupied (<abbr>pp.</abbr> 2⁠–⁠4 <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Anthropologia</i>; London, Balliere, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 1, <time>1873</time>). My motive was to supply travellers with an organ which would rescue their observations from the outer darkness of manuscript, and print their curious information on social and sexual matters out of place in the popular book intended for the Nipptisch and indeed better kept from public view. But, hardly had we begun when “Respectability,” that whited sepulchre full of all uncleanness, rose up against us. “Propriety” cried us down with her brazen blatant voice, and the weak-kneed brethren fell away. Yet the organ was much wanted and is wanted still. All now known barbarous tribes in Inner Africa, America and Australia, whose instincts have not been overlaid by reason, have a ceremony which they call “making men.” As soon as the boy shows proofs of puberty, he and his coevals are taken in hand by the mediciner and the Fetisheer; and, under priestly tuition, they spend months in the “bush,” enduring hardships and tortures which impress the memory till they have mastered the “theorick and practick” of social and sexual relations. Amongst the civilised this fruit of the knowledge-tree must be bought at the price of the bitterest experience, and the consequences of ignorance are peculiarly cruel. Here, then, I find at last an opportunity of noticing in explanatory notes many details of the text which would escape the reader’s observation, and I am confident that they will form a repertory of Eastern knowledge in its esoteric phase. The student who adds the notes of Lane (“Arabian Society,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>, before quoted) to mine will know as much of the Muslim East and more than many Europeans who have spent half their lives in Orient lands. For facility of reference an index of anthropological notes is appended to each volume.</p>
			<p>The reader will kindly bear with the following technical details. Steinhaeuser and I began and ended our work with the first Bulak (“<abbr>Bul.</abbr>”) Edition printed at the port of Cairo in <time datetime="1835"><abbr epub:type="se:era">AH</abbr> 1251=<abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 1835</time>. But when preparing my <abbr>MSS.</abbr> for print I found the text incomplete, many of the stories being given in epitome and not a few ruthlessly mutilated with head or feet wanting. Like most Eastern scribes the Editor could not refrain from “improvements,” which only debased the book; and his sole title to excuse is that the second Bulak Edition (4 <abbr>vols.</abbr> <time datetime="1863"><abbr epub:type="se:era">AH</abbr> 1279=<abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 1863</time>), despite its being “revised and corrected by Sheik Muhammad Qotch al-Adewi,” is even worse; and the same may be said of the Cairo <abbr>Edit.</abbr> (4 <abbr>vols.</abbr> <time datetime="1881"><abbr epub:type="se:era">AH</abbr> 1297=<abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 1881</time>). The Calcutta (“<abbr>Calc.</abbr>”) Edition, with ten lines of Persian preface by the Editor, Ahmed al-Shirwani (<abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 1814), was cut short at the end of the first two hundred Nights, and thus made room for Sir William Hay Macnaghten’s Edition (4 vols, royal 4to) of <time>1839</time>⁠–⁠42. This (“<abbr>Mac.</abbr>”), as by far the least corrupt and the most complete, has been assumed for my basis with occasional reference to the Breslau Edition (“<abbr>Bres.</abbr>”) wretchedly edited from a hideous Egyptian <abbr>MS.</abbr> by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Maximilian Habicht (<time>1825</time>⁠–⁠43). The Bayrut Text “Alif-Leila we Leila” (4 <abbr>vols.</abbr> <abbr>gt.</abbr> 8vo, Beirut. <time>1881</time>⁠–⁠83) is a melancholy specimen of The Nights taken entirely from the Bulak Edition by one Khalil Sarkis and converted to Christianity; beginning without Bismillah, continued with scrupulous castration and ending in ennui and disappointment. I have not used this missionary production.</p>
			<p>As regards the transliteration of Arabic words I deliberately reject the artful and complicated system, ugly and clumsy withal, affected by scientific modern Orientalists. Nor is my sympathy with their prime object, namely to fit the Roman alphabet for supplanting all others. Those who learn languages, and many do so, by the eye as well as by the ear, well know the advantages of a special character to distinguish, for instance, Syriac from Arabic, Gujrati from Marathi. Again this Roman hand bewitched may have its use in purely scientific and literary works; but it would be wholly out of place in one whose purpose is that of the novel, to amuse rather than to instruct. Moreover the devices perplex the simple and teach nothing to the learned. Either the reader knows Arabic, in which case Greek letters, italics and “upper case,” diacritical points and similar typographic oddities are, as a rule with some exceptions, unnecessary; or he does not know Arabic, when none of these expedients will be of the least use to him. Indeed it is a matter of secondary consideration what system we prefer, provided that we mostly adhere to one and the same, for the sake of a consistency which saves confusion to the reader. I have especially avoided that of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lane, adopted by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Payne for special reasons against which it was vain to protest: it represents the debased brogue of Egypt or rather of Cairo; and such a word as Kemer (ez-Zeman) would be utterly unpronounceable to a Badawi. Nor have I followed the practice of my learned friend, Reverend <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. P.</abbr> Badger, in mixing bars and acute accents; the former unpleasantly remind man of those hateful dactyls and spondees, and the latter should, in my humble opinion, be applied to long vowels which in Arabic double, or should double, the length of the shorts. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Badger uses the acute symbol to denote accent or stress of voice; but such <span xml:lang="it">appoggio</span> is unknown to those who speak with purest articulation; for instance whilst the European pronounces Mus-cat̍, and the Arab villager Mas̍-kat; the Children of the Waste, “on whose tongues Allah descended,” articulate Mas-kat. I have therefore followed the simple system adopted in my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pilgrimage</i>, and have accented Arabic words only when first used, thinking it unnecessary to preserve throughout what is an eyesore to the reader and a distress to the printer. In the main I follow <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Johnson on Richardson</i>, a work known to every Anglo-Orientalist as the old and trusty companion of his studies early and late; but even here I have made sundry deviations for reasons which will be explained in the terminal Essay. As words are the embodiment of ideas and writing is of words, so the word is the spoken word; and we should write it as pronounced. Strictly speaking, the <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">e</i>-sound and the <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">o</i>-sound (<abbr>viz.</abbr> the Italian <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">o</i>-sound not the English which is peculiar to us and unknown to any other tongue) are not found in Arabic, except when the figure Imálah obliges: hence they are called “<i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Yá al-Majhúl</i>” and “<i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Waw al-Majhúl</i>” the unknown <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">y</i> (<i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">í</i>) and <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">u</i>. But in all tongues vowel-sounds, the flesh which clothes the bones (consonants) of language, are affected by the consonants which precede and more especially which follow them, hardening and softening the articulation; and deeper sounds accompany certain letters as the sád (<span xml:lang="ar">ص</span>) compared with the sín (<span xml:lang="ar">س</span>). None save a defective ear would hold, as Lane does, “<i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Maulid</i>” (=birth-festival) “more properly pronounced ‘<i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Molid</i>.’ ” Yet I prefer <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Khokh</i> (peach) and <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Jokh</i> (broadcloth) to <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Khukh</i> and <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Jukh</i>; <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Ohod</i> (mount) to <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Uhud</i>; <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Obayd</i> (a little slave) to <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Ubayd</i>; and <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Hosayn</i> (a fortlet, not the <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. N.</abbr> al-Husayn) to <i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Husayn</i>. As for the short <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">e</i> in such words as “<i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Memlúk</i>” for “<i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Mamlúk</i>” (a white slave), “<i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Eshe</i>” for “<i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Asha</i>” (supper), and “Yemen” for “Al-Yaman,” I consider it a flat Egyptianism, insufferable to an ear which admires the Badawi pronunciation. Yet I prefer “<i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Shelebi</i>” (a dandy) from the Turkish <i xml:lang="tr">Chelebi</i>, to “<i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Shalabi</i>;” “Zebdani” (the Syrian village) to “Zabdani,” and “Fes and Miknes” (by the figure Imálah) to “Fás and Miknás,” our “Fez and Mequinez.”</p>
			<p>With respect to proper names and untranslated Arabic words I have rejected all system in favour of common sense. When a term is incorporated in our tongue, I refuse to follow the purist and mortify the reader by startling innovation. For instance, Aleppo, Cairo and Bassorah are preferred to Halab, Kahirah and al-Basrah; when a word is half-naturalised, like Alcoran or Koran, Bashaw or Pasha, which the French write <i xml:lang="fr">Pacha</i>; and Muhammad or Mohammed (for Muhammad), the modern form is adopted because the more familiar. But I see no advantage in retaining, simply because they are the mistakes of a past generation, such words as “Roc” (for Rukh), Khalif (a pretentious blunder for Khalífah and better written Caliph) and “genie” (=Jinn) a mere Gallic corruption not so terrible, however, as “a Bedouin” (=Badawi). As little too would I follow <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lane in foisting upon the public such Arabisms as “<i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Khuff</i>” (a riding-boot), “<i xml:lang="ar-Latn">Mikraʼah</i>” (a palm-rod) and a host of others for which we have good English equivalents. On the other hand I would use, but use sparingly, certain Arabic exclamations, as “Bismillah” (=in the name of Allah!) and “Inshallah” (=if Allah please!), which have special applications and which have been made familiar to English ears by the genius of Fraser and Morier.</p>
			<p>I here end these desultory but necessary details to address the reader in a few final words. He will not think lightly of my work when I repeat to him that with the aid of my annotations supplementing Lane’s, the student will readily and pleasantly learn more of the Muslim’s manners and customs, laws and religion than is known to the average Orientalist; and, if my labours induce him to attack the text of The Nights he will become master of much more Arabic than the ordinary Arab owns. This book is indeed a legacy which I bequeath to my fellow-countrymen in their hour of need. Over devotion to Hindu, and especially to Sanskrit literature, has led them astray from those (so-called) “Semitic” studies, which are the more requisite for us as they teach us to deal successfully with a race more powerful than any pagans⁠—the Muslim. Apparently England is ever forgetting that she is at present the greatest Mohammedan empire in the world. Of late years she has systematically neglected Arabism and, indeed, actively discouraged it in examinations for the Indian Civil Service, where it is incomparably more valuable than Greek and Latin. Hence, when suddenly compelled to assume the reins of government in Muslim lands, as Afghanistan in times past and Egypt at present, she fails after a fashion which scandalises her few (very few) friends; and her crass ignorance concerning the Oriental peoples which should most interest her, exposes her to the contempt of Europe as well as of the Eastern world. When the regretable raids of 1883⁠–⁠84, culminating in the miserable affairs of Tokar, Teb and Tamasi, were made upon the gallant Sudani Negroids, the Bisharin outlying Sawakin, who were battling for the holy cause of liberty and religion and for escape from Turkish taskmasters and Egyptian tax-gatherers, not an English official in camp, after the death of the gallant and lamented Major Morice, was capable of speaking Arabic. Now Muslims are not to be ruled by raw youths who should be at school and college instead of holding positions of trust and emolument. He who would deal with them successfully must be, firstly, honest and truthful and, secondly, familiar with and favourably inclined to their manners and customs if not to their law and religion. We may, perhaps, find it hard to restore to England those pristine virtues, that tone and temper, which made her what she is; but at any rate we (myself and a host of others) can offer her the means of dispelling her ignorance concerning the Eastern races with whom she is continually in contact.</p>
			<p>In conclusion I must not forget to notice that the Arabic ornamentations of these volumes were designed by my excellent friend Yacoub Artin Pasha, of the Ministry of Instruction, Cairo, with the aid of the well-known writing-artist, Shaykh Mohammed Muunis the Cairene. My name, al-Hajj Abdullah (=the Pilgrim Abdallah) was written by an English calligrapher, the lamented Professor Palmer who found a premature death almost within sight of Suez.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:signature">Richard <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Burton.</p>
				<p><b>Wanderers’ Club</b>, <time datetime="1885-08-15">August 15, 1885</time>.</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
